The Project Gutenberg EBook of Philosophy of Osteopathy, by Andrew T. Still

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Philosophy of Osteopathy

Author: Andrew T. Still

Release Date: June 22, 2008 [EBook #25864]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PHILOSOPHY OF OSTEOPATHY ***




Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








   [Illustration: A. T. Still.]

   Philosophy of Osteopathy;

   BY

   ANDREW T. STILL,


   DISCOVERER OF THE SCIENCE OF OSTEOPATHY AND
   PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN SCHOOL
   OF OSTEOPATHY.


   PUBLISHED BY
   A. T. STILL, KIRKSVILLE, MO
   1899.

   Copyrighted, 1899, by
   A. T. STILL.


   Lithoprinted by
   EDWARD BROTHERS, INC.
   Ann Arbor, Michigan, U.S.A.




Preface.


Many of my friends have been anxious ever since Osteopathy became an
established fact, that I should write a treatise on the science. But I
was never convinced that the time was ripe for such a production, nor am
I even now convinced that this is not a little premature. Osteopathy is
only in its infancy, it is a great unknown sea just discovered, and as
yet we are only acquainted with its shore-tide.

When I saw others who had not more than skimmed the surface of the
science, taking up the pen to write books on Osteopathy, and after
having carefully examined their productions, found they were drinking
from the fountains of old schools of drugs, dragging back the science to
the very systems from which I divorced myself so many years ago, and
realized that hungry students were ready to swallow such mental poison,
dangerous as it was, I became fully awakened to the necessity of some
sort of Osteopathic literature for those wishing to be informed.

This book is free from quotations from medical authors, and differs
from them in opinion on almost every important question. I do not expect
it to meet their approval; such a thing would be unnatural and
impossible.

It is my object in this work to teach principles as I understand them,
and not rules. I do not instruct the student to punch or pull a certain
bone, nerve or muscle for a certain disease, but by a knowledge of the
normal and abnormal, I hope to give a specific knowledge for all
diseases.

This work has been written a little at a time for several years, just as
I could snatch a moment from other cares to devote to it. I have
carefully compiled these thoughts into a treatise. Every principle
herein laid down has been fairly well tested by myself, and proven true.

The book has been written by myself in my own way, without any ambition
to fine writing, but to give to the world a start in a philosophy that
may be a guide in the future.

Owing to the great haste with which the book has been rushed through the
press to meet the urgent demand, we will ask the indulgence of the
public for any imperfection that may appear. Hoping the world may profit
by these thoughts, I am,

   Respectfully,
   A. T. STILL.

   Kirksville, Mo., Sept. 1, 1899.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

SOME INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.

Not a Work of Compilation--Authors Quoted--Method of Reasoning--The
Osteopath an Artist--When I Became an Osteopath--Dr. Neal's Opinion--The
Opinions of Others--What Studies Necessary--What I Mean by
Anatomy--Principles--The Practicing Osteopath's Guide--The Fascia--Not a
pleasing Task--Without Accepted Theories--Truths of Nature--Body, Motion
and Mind--Osteopathy to Cure Disease--The Osteopath Should Find
Health.                                                           Page 11


CHAPTER II.

OSTEOPATHIC EXPLORATIONS.

Divisions of the Body--Searching for the Cause--Duty of the Osteopathic
Explorer--Classification and Division--The Abnormal--Nerve
Powers--Witnesses to Examine--Abnormal Growths--Cerebro Spinal
Fluid--Body in Perfect Health--Chemistry--Nature's Chemistry.     Page 29


CHAPTER III.

THE HEAD.

A Free Circulation--Death Blows--Something of the Neck--Order of
Treatment--The Pelvis--Brains of Animals--Arterial Motion--Mental
Vibrations--Overburdening the Mind--Hemiplegia.                   Page 43


CHAPTER IV.

EAR WAX AND ITS USES.

Nature Makes Nothing in Vain--A Successful Experiment--A Question for
Ages--The Position--Meaning of Life--Some Questions Asked--Condition in
Certain Diseases Caused by Cold--Cerumen in Fluid State--Winter Kills
Babies--Some Advice to Mothers--A Case in Point--Connection of the brain
and Other Nerves in Digestion--Unaided Investigation.             Page 53


CHAPTER V.

DISEASES OF THE CHEST.

Where Confined--Consumption--Can Consumption Be Cured--Consumption
Described--No Time for Surrender--Cerebral Spinal Fluid--How to Destroy
Deadly Bombs of Decay--Battle of Blood for Life--Miliary
Tuberculosis--Conversion of Bodies Into Gas--Forming a
Tubercle--Breeding Contagion--The Seeds of Disease--Generating
Fever--Whooping Cough--Clouds and Lungs Are Much Alike--The Wisdom of
Nature--Water Formed in Lungs--The Law of Fives--Feeble Action of
Heart--The Heart--From Neck to Heart--Dyspersia or Imperfect
Digestion.                                                        Page 68


CHAPTER VI.

THE LYMPHATICS.

Importance of the Subject--Demands of Nature on the
Lymphatics--Dunglinson's Definition--Dangers of Dead Substances--Lymph
Continued--Solvent in Nature--Where Are the Lymphatics Situated?--The
Fat and Lean.                                                    Page 104


CHAPTER VII.

THE DIAPHRAGM.

Investigation--A Struggle With Nature--Lesson of Cause and
Effect--Something of Medical Etiquette--The Medical Doctor--An Explorer
for Truth Must Be Independent--The Diaphragm Introduced--A Useful
Study--Combatting Effect--Is Least Understood--A Case of Bilious
Fever--A Demand on the Nerves--Danger of Compression--A Cause for
Disease--Was a Mistake Made in the Creation--An Exploration--Result of
Removal of Diaphragm--Sustaining Life in Principles--Law Applicable to
Other Organs--Power of Diaphragm--Omentum.                       Page 114


CHAPTER VIII.

LIVER, BOWELS AND KIDNEYS.

Gender of the Liver--Productions of the Liver--A Hope for the
Afflicted--Evidences of Truth--Loaded With Ignorance--Lack of Knowledge
of the Kidney--How a Purgative Acts--Flux--Bloody Dysentery--Flux More
Fully Described--Osteopathic Remedies--Medical Remedies--More of the
Osteopathic Remedy.                                              Page 138


CHAPTER IX.

THE BLOOD.

Uses for Fluids--Blood an Unknown Fluid--Harvey Only Reached the Banks
of the River of Life--Blood Is Systematically Furnished--Fatality of
Ignorance--To Find the Cause Must Be Honest--Following Arteries and
Nerves--Feeding the Nerves--The Blood on Its Journey--Powers Necessary
to Move Blood--Venous Blood Suspended.                           Page 149


CHAPTER X.

THE FASCIA.

Where Is Disease Sown?--An Illustration of Conception--The Greatest
Problem--A Fountain of Supply--Fascia Omnipresent--Connection with
Spinal Cord--Goes With and Covers All Muscles--Proofs in
Contagion--Study of Nerves and Fascia--Tumefy--Tumefaction.      Page 161


CHAPTER XI.

FEVERS.

Be Armed With Facts--Union of Human Gases With Oxygen--Fever and
Nettle-rash. Nature Constructs for a Wise Purpose--Processes of Life
Must be Kept in Motion--No Satisfaction from Authors--Animal
Heat--Semeiology--Symptomatology--Definition of Fever--Fevers only
Effects--Result of Stoppages of Vein or Artery--Aneurisms.       Page 175


CHAPTER XII.

SCARLET FEVER AND SMALLPOX.

As defined by Allopathy--Scarlet Fever as Defined by
Osteopathy--Smallpox--Power to Drive Greater Than in Measles.    Page 190


CHAPTER XIII.

A CHAPTER OF WONDERS AND SOME VALUABLE QUESTIONS.

Wonders on the Increase--What Is Life?--How Is Action Produced--Acquaint
Yourself With the Machinery--Duty of the Osteopath--Formation of
Sacrum--The Pelvis--Appearance of OEdema--Do All Diseases Have
Appearance in OEdema.                                            Page 193


CHAPTER XIV.

HAS MAN DEGENERATED?

The Advent of Man--Care of the Stock Raiser--Mental Degeneration Makes
It Unpleasant for an Original Thinker--Original Thinkers of the
Ancients--Methods of Healing--Failure of Allopathy--Primitive
Man--Evidences of Prehistoric Man--Mental Dwarfage.              Page 203


CHAPTER XV.

OSTEOPATHIC TREATMENT.

Five Points--Visceral List--Care in Treating the Spinal Column--Most
Important Chapter--Perfect Drainage--A Natural Cure.             Page 213


CHAPTER XVI.

REASONING TESTS.

The Vermiform Appendix--Operating for Appendicitis--Expelling Power of
the Vermiform Appendix--Care Exercised in Making Assertions--Reasoning
Tests--A List of Unexplained Diseases--Concluding Remarks.       Page 223


CHAPTER XVII.

OBSTETRICS.

Overloading--Similarity of Stomach and Womb--Births--Preparation for
Delivery--Caution--Lasceration Need Not Occur--Care of Cord--Severing
Cord--Putting on Belly Band--Delivery of Afterbirth--Preparing for
Mother's Comfort--Post-Delivery Hemorrhage--Treatment for--Food for
Mother--Treatment for Sore Breast.                               Page 234


CHAPTER XVIII.

CONVULSIONS.

Old Phrases--Results of Stoppage of Fluids--Old Theory of Fits--What the
Real Cause may be--Listen for the Cause--What is a Fit--Sensory System
Demanding Nourishment--The Causes--The Remedy--Dislocation of Atlas and
of the Four Upper Ribs.                                          Page 250


CHAPTER XIX.

CONCLUDING REMARKS.

Thoughts for Consideration--Offering a New Philosophy--Lymphatics and
Fascia--A Satisfactory Experiment--Natural Washing Out.          Page 258


CHAPTER XX.

THE SUPERIOR CERVICAL GANGLION.

With What It Has Communication--Its Course--One of its
Functions--Stimulation or Inhibition--Result Produced.           Page 263




Philosophy of Osteopathy.




CHAPTER I.

SOME INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.

     Not a Work of Compilation--Authors Quoted--Method of Reasoning--The
     Osteopath an Artist--When I Became an Osteopath--Dr. Neal's
     Opinion--The Opinions of Others--What Studies Necessary--What I
     Mean by Anatomy--Principles--The Practicing Osteopath's Guide--The
     Fascia--Not a Pleasing Task--Without Accepted Theories--Truths of
     Nature--Body, Motion and Mind--Osteopathy to Cure Disease--The
     Osteopath Should Find Health.


NOT A WORK OF COMPILATION.

To readers of my book on the Philosophy of Osteopathy, I wish to say
that I will not tire you with a book of compilations just to sell to the
anxious reader. As I have spent thirty years of my life reading and
following rules and remedies used for curing, and learned in sorrow it
was useless to listen to their claims, for instead of getting good, I
obtained much harm therefrom, I asked for, and obtained a mental divorce
from them, and I want it to be understood that drugs and I are as far
apart as the East is from the West; now, and forever. Henceforth I will
follow the dictates of nature in all I say or write.


AUTHORS QUOTED.

I quote no authors but God and experience when I write, or lecture to
the classes or the masses, because no book written by medical writers
can be of much use to us, and it would be very foolish to look to them
for advice and instruction on a science they know nothing of. They are
illy able to advise for themselves, they have never been asked to advise
us, and I am free to say but few persons who have been pupils of my
school have tried to get wisdom from medical writers and apply it as
worthy to be taught as any part of Osteopathy, philosophy or practice.
Several books have been compiled, called "Principles of Osteopathy."
They may sell but will fail to give the knowledge the student desires.


METHOD OF REASONING.

The student of any philosophy succeeds best by the more simple methods
of reasoning. We reason for needed knowledge only, and should try and
start out with as many known facts as possible. If we would reason on
diseases of the organs of the head, neck, abdomen or pelvis, we must
first know where these organs are, how and from what arteries the eye,
ear, or tongue is fed.


THE OSTEOPATH AN ARTIST.

I believe you are taught anatomy in our school more thoroughly than any
other school to date, because we want you to carry a living picture of
all or any part of the body in your mind as a ready painter carries the
picture of the face, scenery, beast or any thing he wishes to represent
by his brush. He would only be a waster of time and paint and make a
daub that would disgust any one who would employ him. We teach you
anatomy in all its branches, that you may be able to have and keep a
living picture before your mind all the time, so you can see all joints,
ligaments, muscles, glands, arteries, veins, lymphatics, fascia
superficial and deep, all organs, how they are fed, what they must do,
and why they are expected to do a part, and what would follow in case
that part was not done well and on time. I feel free to say to my
students, keep your minds full of pictures of the normal body all the
time, while treating the afflicted.


WHEN I BECAME AN OSTEOPATH.

In answer to the questions of how long have you been teaching this
discovery, and what books are essential to the study? I will say I began
to give reasons for my faith in the laws of life as given to men, worlds
and beings by the God of nature, June, 1874, when I began to talk and
propound questions to men of learning. I thought the sword and cannons
of nature were pointed and trained upon our systems of drug doctoring.


DR. NEAL'S OPINION.

I asked Dr. J. M. Neal, of Edinburg, Scotland, for some information that
I needed badly. He was a medical doctor of five years training, a man of
much mental ability, who would give his opinions freely and to the
point. I have been told by one or more Scotch M. D.'s that a Dr. John M.
Neal, of Edinburg, was hung for murder. He was not hung while with me.
The only thing made me doubt him being a Scotchman was he loved whiskey,
and I had been told that the Scotch were a sensible people. John M. Neal
said that "drugs was the bait of fools"; it was no science, and the
system of drugs was only a trade, followed by the doctor for the money
that could be obtained by it from the ignorant sick. He believed that
nature was a law capable of vindicating its power all over the world.


THE OPINIONS OF OTHERS.

As this writing is for the information of the student I will continue
the history by saying, that in the early days of Osteopathy I sought the
opinions of the most learned, such as Dr. Schnebly, Professor of
Language and History in the Baker University, Baldwin, Kansas; Dr.
Dallas, a very learned M. D. of the Alopathic faith; Dr. F. A. Grove,
well-known in Kirksville; J. B. Abbott, Indian agent, and many others of
renown. Then back to the tombs of the dead, to better acquaint myself
with the systems of medicine and the foundations of truth upon which
they stood, if any. I will not worry your patience with a list of the
names of authors that have written upon the subject of medicine, as
remedial agents. I will use the word that the theologian often uses when
asked whom Christ died for, the answer universally is, ALL. All
intelligent medical writers say by word or inference that drugs or
drugging is a system of blind guess work, and if we should let our
opinions be governed by the marble lambs and other emblems of dead
babies found in the cemeteries of the world, we would say that John M.
Neal was possibly hung for murder, not through design, but through
traditional ignorance of the power of nature to cure both old and young,
by skillfully adjusting the engines of life so as to bring forth pure
and healthy blood, the greatest known germicide, to one capable to
reason who has the skill to conduct the vitalizing and protecting fluids
to throat, lungs and all parts of the system, and ward off diseases as
nature's God has indicated. With this faith and method of reasoning, I
began to treat diseases by Osteopathy as an experimenter, and
notwithstanding I obtained good results in all cases in diseases of
climate and contagions, I hesitated for years to proclaim to the world
that there was but little excuse for a master engineer to lose a child
in cases of diphtheria, croup, measles, mumps, whooping cough, flux and
other forms of summer diseases, peculiar to children. Neither was it
necessary for the adult to die with diseases of summer, fall and winter.
But at last I took my stand on this rock and my confidence in nature,
where I have stood and fought the battles, and taken the enemy's flag in
every engagement for the last twenty-five years.


WHAT STUDIES NECESSARY.

As you contemplate studying this science and have asked to know the
necessary studies, I wish to impress it upon your minds that you begin
with anatomy, and you end with anatomy, a knowledge of anatomy is all
you want or need, as it is all you can use or ever will use in your
practice, although you may live one hundred years. You have asked for my
opinion as the founder of the science. Yours is an honest question, and
God being my judge I will give you just as honest an answer. As I have
said, a knowledge of anatomy with its application covers every inch of
ground that is necessary to qualify you to become a skillful and
successful Osteopath, when you go forth into the world to combat
diseases.


WHAT I MEAN BY ANATOMY.

I will now define what I mean by anatomy. I speak by comparison and
tell you what belongs to the study of anatomy. I will take a chicken
whose parts and habits all persons are familiar with to illustrate. The
chicken has a head, a neck, a breast, a tail, two legs, two wings, two
eyes, two ears, two feet, one gizzard, one crop, one set of bowels, one
liver, and one heart. This chicken has a nervous system, a glandular
system, a muscular system, a system of lungs and other parts and
principles not necessary to speak of in detail. But I want to emphasize,
they belong to the chicken, and it would not be a chicken without every
part or principle. These must all be present and answer roll call or we
do not have a complete chicken. Now I will try and give you the parts of
anatomy and the books that pertain to the same. You want some standard
author on descriptive anatomy in which you learn the form and places of
all bones, the place and uses of ligaments, muscles and all that belong
to the soft parts. Then from the descriptive anatomy you are conducted
into the dissecting room, in which you receive demonstrations, and are
shown all parts through which blood and other fluids are conducted. So
far you see you are in anatomy. From the demonstrator you are conducted
to another room or branch of anatomy called physiology, a knowledge of
which no Osteopath can do without and be a success. In that room you are
taught how the blood and other fluids of life are produced, and the
channels through which this fluid is conducted to the heart and lungs
for purity and other qualifying processes, previous to entering the
heart for general circulation to nourish and sustain the whole human
body. I want to insist and impress it upon your minds that this is as
much a part of anatomy as a wing is a part of a chicken. From this room
of anatomy you are conducted to the room of histology, in which the eye
is aided by powerful microscopes and made acquainted with the smallest
arteries of the human body, which in life are of the greatest known
importance, remembering that in the room of histology you are still
studying anatomy, and what that machinery can and does execute every
day, hour, and minute of life. From the histological room you are
conducted to the room of elementary chemistry, in which you learn
something of the laws of association of substances, that you can the
better understand what has been told you in the physiological room,
which is only a branch of anatomy, and intended to show you that nature
can and does successfully compound and combine elements for muscles,
blood, teeth and bone. From there you are taken to the room of the
clinics, where you are first made acquainted with both the normal and
abnormal human body, which is only a continuation of the study of
anatomy. From there you are taken to the engineer's room (or operator's
room) in which you are taught how to observe and detect abnormalities
and the effect or effects they may and do produce, and how they effect
health and cause that condition known as disease.


PRINCIPLES.

Principles to an Osteopath means a perfect plan and specification to
build in form a house, an engine, a man, a world, or anything for an
object or purpose. To comprehend this engine of life or man which is so
constructed with all conveniences for which it was made, it is necessary
to constantly keep the plan and specification before the mind, and in
the mind, to such a degree that there is no lack of knowledge of the
bearings and uses of all parts. After a complete knowledge of all parts
with their forms, sizes and places of attachment which should be so
thoroughly grounded in the memory that there would be no doubt of the
intent of the builder for the use or purpose of the great and small
parts, and why they have a part to perform in the workings of the
engine. When this part of the specification is thoroughly learned from
anatomy or the engineer's guide book, he will then take up the chapter
on the division of forces, by which this engine moves and performs the
duties for which it was created. In this chapter the mind will be
referred to the brain to obtain a knowledge of that organ, where the
force starts, how it is conducted to any belt, pully, journal, or
division of the whole building. After learning where the force is
obtained, and how conveyed from place to place throughout the whole
body, he becomes interested and wisely instructed. He sees the various
parts of this great system of life when preparing fluids commonly known
as blood, passing through a set of tubes both great and small--some so
vastly small, as to require the aid of powerful microscopes to see their
infinitely small forms, through which the blood and other fluids are
conducted by the heart and force of the brain, to construct organs,
muscles, membranes and all the things necessary to life and motion, to
the parts separately and combined. By this minute acquaintance with the
normal body which has been learned in the specification as written in
standard authors of anatomy and the dissecting rooms, he is well
prepared to be invited into the inspection room to receive comparisons
between the normal and abnormal engines, built according to nature's
plan and specification, and absolutely perfect. He is called into this
room for the purpose of comparing engines that have been strained from
being thrown off the track, or run against other bodies with such force
as to bend journals, pipes, break or loosen bolts; or otherwise
deranged, so as to render it useless until repaired. To repair signifies
to readjust from the abnormal condition in which the machinist finds it,
to the condition of the normal engines which stand in the shop of
repairs. His inspection would commence by first lining up the wheels
with straight journals; then he would naturally be conducted to the
boiler, steam chest, shafts, and every part that belongs to a completed
engine. To know that they are straight and in place as shown upon the
plan and described by the specification, he has done all that is
required of a master mechanic. Then it goes into the hands of the
engineer, who waters, fires and conducts this artificial being on its
journey. You as Osteopathic machinists can go no farther than to adjust
the abnormal condition, in which you find the afflicted. Nature will do
the rest.


THE PRACTICING OSTEOPATH'S GUIDE.

The Osteopath reasons if he reasons at all, that order and health are
inseparable, and that when order in all parts is found, disease cannot
prevail, and if order is complete and disease should be found, there is
no use for order. And if order and health are universally one in union,
then the doctor cannot usefully, physiologically, or philosophically be
guided by any scale of reason, otherwise. Does a chemist get results
desired by accident? Are your accidents more likely to get good results
than his? Does order and success demand thought and cool headed reason?
If we wish to be governed by reason, we must take a position that is
founded on truth and capable of presenting facts, to prove the validity
of all truths we present. A truth is only a hopeful supposition if it is
not supported by results. Thus all nature is kind enough to willingly
exhibit specimens of its work as vindicating witnesses of its ability to
prove its assertions by its work. Without that tangible proof, nature
would belong to the gods of chance. The laws of mother, conception,
growth and birth, from atoms to worlds would be a failure, a universe
without a head to direct. But as the beautiful works of nature stand
to-day, and in all time past, fully able by the evidence it holds before
the eye and mind of reason, that all beings great and small came by the
law of cause and effect, are we not bound to work by the laws of cause,
if we wish an effect? If the heavens do move by cause when was its
beings divorced from that great common law? Are we not bound to trust
and work by the old and reliable self-evident laws, until something
later has proven its superior ability to ward off disease and cure the
sick.


THE FASCIA.

I know of no part of the body that equals the fascia as a hunting
ground. I believe that more rich golden thought will appear to the
mind's eye as the study of the fascia is pursued than any division of
the body. Still one part is just as great and useful as any other in its
place. No part can be dispensed with. But the fascia is the ground in
which all causes of death do the destruction of life. Every view we
take, a wonder appears. Here we find a place for the white corpuscles
building anew and giving strength to throw impurities from the body by
tubes that run from the skin to tanks of useful fluids, that would heap
up and are no longer of use in the body. No doubt nerves exist in the
fascia, that change the fluid to gas, and force it through the spongy
and porous system as a delivery by the vital chain of wonders, that go
on all the time to keep nerves wholly pure.


NOT A PLEASANT TASK.

I dislike to write, and only do so, when I think my productions will go
into the hands of kind-hearted geniuses who read, not to find a book of
quotations, but to go with the soul of the subject that is being
explored for its merits,--weigh all truths and help bring its uses front
for the good of man.

Osteopathy has not asked a place in written literature prior to this
date, and does not hope to appear on written pages even to suit the
author of this imperfectly written book.


WITHOUT ACCEPTED THEORIES.

Columbus had to launch and navigate much and long, and meet many storms,
because he had not the written experience of other travelers to guide
him. He had only a few bits of drift-wood not common to his home growth,
to cause him to move as he did. But there was a fact, a bit of wood that
did not grow on his home soil.

He reasoned that it must be from some land amid the sea whose shores had
not before been known to his race. With these facts and his powerful
mind of reason, he met all opposition, and moved alone; just as all men
do who have no use for theories as their compass to guide them through
the storms. This opposition a mental explorer must meet.

I felt that I must anchor my boat to living truths and follow them
wheresoever they might drift. Thus I launched my boat many years ago on
the open seas, fearlessly, and have never found a wave of scorn nor
abuse that truth could not eat, and do well on.


TRUTHS OF NATURE.

We often speak of truth. We say great truths, and use many other
qualifying expressions. But no one truth is greater than any other
truth. Each has a sphere of usefulness peculiar to itself. Thus we
should treat with respect and reverence all truths, great and small. A
truth is the complete work of nature, which can only be demonstrated by
the vital principle belonging to that class of truths. Each truth or
division as we see it, can only be made known to us by the self evident
fact, which this truth is able to demonstrate by its action.

If we take man as our object to base the beginning of our reason, we
find the association of many elements, which differ in kind to suit the
purpose for which they were designed. To us they act, to us they are
wisely formed and located for the purpose for which they were designed.
Through our five senses we deal with the material body. It has action.
That we observe by vision which connects the mind to reason. High above
the five senses on the subject of cause or causes of this, is motion. By
the testimony of the witness the mind is connected in a manner by which
it can reason on solidity and size. By smell, taste and sound, we make
other connections between the chambers of reason and the object we
desire to reason upon; and thus our foundation on which all five
witnesses are arrayed to the superior principle which is mind.

After seeing a human being complete in form, self moving, with power to
stop or go on at will, to us he seems to obey some commander. He seems
to go so far and stop; he lies down and gets up; he turns round and
faces the objects that are traveling in the same direction he does.
Possibly he faces the object by his own action. Then by about facing, he
sees one coming with greater velocity, sees he can not escape by his own
speed, so he steps aside and lets that body pass on, as though he moved
in obedience to some order. The bystander would ask the question, "How
did he know such a dangerous body was approaching?" He finds on the most
crucial examination, that the sense of hearing is wholly without reason.
The same is true with all the five senses pertaining to man, beast, or
bird. This being the condition of the five physical senses, we are
forced by reason to conclude there is a superior being who conducts the
material man, sustains, supports and guards against danger; and after
all our explorations, we have to decide that man is triune when
complete.


BODY, MOTION AND MIND.

First the material body, second the spiritual being, third a being of
mind which is far superior to all vital motions and material forms,
whose duty is to wisely manage this great engine of life. This great
principle known as mind, must depend for all evidences on the five
senses, and on this testimony, all mental conclusions are bad, and all
orders from this mental court are issued to move to any point or stop at
any place. Thus to obtain good results, we must blend ourselves with,
and travel in harmony with nature's truths. When this great machine man,
ceases to move in all its parts, which we call death, the explorers
knife discovers no mind, no motion. He simply finds formulated matter
with no motor to move it, with no mind to direct it. He can trace the
channels through which the fluids have circulated, he can find the
relation of parts to other parts; in fact by the knife, he can expose to
view the whole machinery that once was wisely active. Suppose the
explorer is able to add the one principle motion, at once we would see
an action, but it would be a confused action. Still he is not the man
desired to be produced. There is one addition that is indispensable to
control this active body, or machine, and that is mind. With that added
the whole machinery then works as man. The three when united in full
action are able to exhibit the thing desired--complete.


OSTEOPATHY TO CURE DISEASE.

The Osteopath seeks first physiological perfection of form, by normally
adjusting the osseous frame work, so that all arteries may deliver blood
to nourish and construct all parts. Also that the veins may carry away
all impurities dependent upon them for renovation. Also that the nerves
of all classes may be free and unobstructed while applying the powers of
life and motion to all divisions, and the whole system of nature's
laboratory.

A full and complete supply of arterial blood must be generated and
delivered to all parts, organs and glands, by the channels called the
arteries. And when it has done its work, then without delay the veins
must return all to heart and lungs for renewal. We must know some delay
of fluids has been established on which nature begins the work of
renewal by increased action of electricity, even to the solvent action
of fever heat, by which watery substances evaporate and relieve the
lymphatic system of stagnant, watery secretions. Thus fever is a natural
and powerful remedy.


THE OSTEOPATH SHOULD FIND HEALTH.

To find health should be the object of the doctor. Anyone can find
disease. He should make the grand round among the sentinels and
ascertain if they are asleep, dead or have deserted their posts, and
have allowed the enemy to get into camps. He should visit all posts.
Before he goes out to make the rounds, he should know where all posts
are, and the value of the supply he has charge of, whether it be shot,
shell, grub, clothing, arms or anything of value to the Company or
Division.




CHAPTER II.

OSTEOPATHIC EXPLORATIONS.

     Divisions of the Body--Searching for the Cause--Duty of the
     Osteopathic Explorer--Classification and Division--The
     Abnormal--Nerve Powers--Witnesses to Examine--Abnormal
     Growths--Cerebro Spinal Fluid--Body in Perfect
     Health--Chemistry--Nature's Chemistry.


DIVISIONS OF THE BODY.

After many long years, treating and trying to teach the student of
Osteopathy how to hunt for and find the local causes of diseases, not
contagious, or infectious, I have succeeded in planning and suggesting a
method, which I am sure the doctor can easily follow, and find any
diversion from the normal, that would interfere with the nerves, veins,
and arteries, of any organ or limb of the body. I have formulated a
simple mental diagram that divides the body into three parts, chest,
upper and lower limbs. The first division takes in head, neck, chest,
abdomen and pelvis. The second division takes in head, neck, lower and
upper arm and hand. The third division takes in foot, leg, thigh, pelvis
and lumbar vertebra. I make this division for the purpose of holding the
explorer to the limits of all supplies. In the ellipse of the chest is
found all vital supplies; then from that center of life we have two
branches only, one of the arm, and one of the lower limb. In each
division we have five points of exploration.[1]

[Footnote 1: Explore: (1) To seek for or after: to strive to attain by
search; to look wisely and carefully for; to search through or into; to
penetrate or range over for discovery; to examine thoroughly; as, to
explore new countries or seas; to explore the depths of science; "hidden
frauds (to) explore."--WEBSTER.]


SEARCHING FOR THE CAUSE.

To illustrate, we will take the lower limb, whether there is lameness,
soreness, gouty, rheumatic, neuralgic, swollen, shrunken, feverish,
cold, smooth and glassy, sores, ulcers, erysipelas, milkleg, varicose
veins, or any defect that the patient may complain of, who is the only
reliable book or being of symptomatology. For convenience we will divide
that lower limb into five parts, the foot, leg, thigh, pelvis and lumbar
region. The patient (symptomatologist) tells us he has a pain in front,
center and under part of foot. Now the doctor or bird dog, can find
quails of reason in but one field that would lead him to the cause. As
this field is divided into five parts and the hunter has carefully
searched four divisions, he will find the cause or causes in the fifth
and none other. If a dislocated bone is not found in the foot after
ascertaining that there has been no crushing by falling bodies, horses
feet, stepping on glass, nails and other things that would penetrate the
foot, and irritate by being broken off, closed and remaining in the
flesh; we will explore the leg for the quail, ascertain if the
articulation is normal at ankle and knee. If we find the bone is not
broken, the leg has no splinters of wood, nor injured flesh by bites
from dogs or other animals, nor any other substance that would injure
the leg, we are prepared to pass on and explore another place for pain
in the foot. We go on to division No. 3 or the thigh division, and
ascertain if the thigh is normal in all conditions, properly in socket,
with all muscles, ligaments and nerves unoppressed. There are but two
more divisions left for exploration, and they are the most important and
interesting of the five, the pelvis and lumbar, through which all the
nerves of the limb pass. We must stop at pelvis and observe carefully
that there is no twist of ligaments before going to lumbar, which is the
last of the five divisions. If we have found nothing in the previous
four, and have explored them as carefully as we should, we have but one
brush heap left, and that one contains the quail that we have been
hunting for. As the lumbar contains and conveys all nerve forces to the
pelvis from the brain and all divisions of the lower limbs, we will now
examine the articulations of that part of the spine, and in that we are
very certain to find the cause if we have made no mistake in our
examination in the preceding divisions of the limb. As we enter the
exploration of this part of the spine we must remember that we are about
to deal with the many divisions of the nerves of the _cauda equina_. The
great question before us, comes after this form. What would wound or
bruise any division of nerves that would lead by the way of the great or
lesser sciatic, to a bone in the front and under side of the foot? Jars,
strains, twists, and dislocations, must be carefully searched for. A
partial dislocation of one side of the spine would produce a twist which
would throw one muscle on to another and another, straining ligaments,
producing conjestion and inflammation, or some irritation that would
lead to a suspension of the fluids necessary to the harmonious vitality
of the foot, which is the great and only cause by which the suffering is
produced in a foreign land, which we call a famine in the foot.


DUTY OF THE OSTEOPATHIC EXPLORER.

This method of exploration is not directed by the sound of the fog-horns
of unreliable and unsatisfactory symptomatology. Osteopathy has a method
of its own, which is correct or it has no method at all, and is guided
by the surveyor's compass that will find all corners as established by
the orders of the government and surveyor's general. Thus an Osteopath
must find the true corners as set by the Divine Surveyor. The general
surveyor hands our plats and specifications to the division general,
with instructions to establish all lines and divisions, state, county,
township and sections, and mark each one by stones or otherwise, so they
cannot be lost; but are findable by any competent surveyor who follows
the field notes displayed in anatomy. Thus you would see a successful
Osteopath is guided by the field notes of nature to all corners, his
business is to know that every corner stone is in its place, standing
erect as nature designed and established it. If he tolerates any
variation of this stone or stones from the place or places that God the
grand surveyor of the universe has placed them, he will observe there is
an infringement and cause for inharmony and discord of the possessors of
the four quarter sections of land, for which this cornerstone was
placed; and his sworn duty is to bring this stone from any variation
from the field notes and establish it where it was first placed. Thus
his ability to find the true corners and adjust all stones will mark him
as a successful Osteopath.


CLASSIFICATION AND DIVISION.

I will classify or divide man's body for convenience of exploration for
diseases into head and neck first; then head, neck and chest, third,
head, neck, chest and abdomen; then unite head, neck, chest, abdomen and
sacrum. I will take up a few diseases under each division as they are
located. By this method I think I can better show what nerves should be
more or less active.


THE ABNORMAL.

A lesion may and does appear on a part or all of the person which may
appear as a growth or withering away of a limb in all its muscles,
nerves and blood supply. As in case of tumors on scalp, loss of hair,
eruptions of face, growth of tonsils, ulcers of one or both ears,
growths on outside and inside of eyes, a cause must precede an effect in
all cases. A pain in head is an effect; cause is older than the effect
and is absolute in all variations from normal conditions. A tumor on the
head and under the skin is an effect only. It took matter to give it
size, it took power to deliver that substance, the fact that a tumor was
formed, shows that the power to build was present and did the work of
construction. Another power should have been there to complete the work
at that location; that power is the offbearing of the dead matter after
the work of construction was complete.


NERVE POWERS.

If we think as men of reason should, we will count five nerve powers.
They must all be present to build a part, and must answer promptly at
roll call and work all the time. The names of these master workmen are
sensation, motion, nutrition, voluntary and involuntary. All must answer
at every roll call during life; none can be granted a leave of absence
for a moment. Suppose sensation should leave a limb for a time, have we
not a giving away of all cells and glands? An undue filling up follows
quickly because sensation limits and tells when the supply is too great
for the use of the builder's purpose. Suppose the nerve power known as
motion should fail for a time, starvation would soon begin its deadly
work for want of food. Suppose again the nerves of nutrition should fail
to apply the nourishing showers we would surely die in sight of food.
With the voluntary nerves we move or stay at the will of he or she who
wishes to give direction to the motor powers, at any time a change by
action is required. At this time I will stop defining the several and
varied uses of the five kinds of nerves, and begin to account for
growths and other variations, from the healthy to the unhealthy
conditions of man. The above named are the five known powers of animal
life, and to direct them wisely is the work of the doctor of
Osteopathy.


WITNESSES TO EXAMINE.

He has five witnesses to examine in all cases he has under his care. He
must give close attention to the source and supply of healthy blood. If
blood is too scant he must look to the motor systems of blood making,
that would surely invite his most careful attention and study of the
abdomen. He cannot expect blood to quietly pass through the diaphragm if
impeded by muscular constriction around aorta, vena cava or thoracic
duct. The diaphragm can and is often pulled down on both vena cava and
thoracic duct, obstructing blood and chyle from returning to heart so
much as to limit the chyle below the requirement of healthy blood, or
even suppress the nerve action of lymphatics to such degree as to cause
dropsy of the abdomen, or a stoppage of venous blood by pressure on vena
cava so long that venous blood would be in stages of ferment when it
enters the heart for renovation, and when purified and returned the
supply is too small to sustain life to a normal standard.


ABNORMAL GROWTHS.

Thus the importance of a careful attention to the normal certainty of
all the ribs to which the diaphragm is attached is essential. The
eleventh and twelfth ribs may, and do often get pushed so far from their
normal bearings, that they are often found turned in a line with the
spine, with cartilaginous ends down near ilio-lumbar articulation. When
in such position they draw the diaphragm down heavily on vena cava at
about the fourth lumbar. Then you have cause for intermittent pulse, as
the heart finds no passage of blood through the prolapsed diaphragm
which is also stopping the vena cava and producing universal stagnation
of blood and other fluids in all organs and glands below the diaphragm.
Thus you have a beginning for abnormal growths of womb, kidneys and all
lymphatics of liver, kidneys, spleen, pancreas, and all tumors of
abdomen.


CEREBRO SPINAL FLUID.

To satisfy the mind of a philosopher who is mentally capable of asking
for and knowing truth, when presented by nature, you must come at him
outside of the limits of conjecture, and address him with self-evident
truths only. When he takes up the philosophy of the great subject of
life, to him who does know truth, no substitute can to any degree
satisfy his mental demands. To the one who would deal in conjectures or
suppose so's, he will at once be placed in the proper category to which
he belongs, which is the drift-wood that floats down the dark river that
is overshadowed by the nightmare of ignorance and superstition. A
seeker after truth, is a man of few words, and they are used by him only
by the truths or facts discovered. He has no patience with the unmeaning
records offered only to please the credulous, and by those of little or
no truth that appears during a long recitation of ungrounded statements.
From the above it is wisely seen that the object of these remarks is to
present a few truths for the purpose of stimulating the attention of the
listener. We will take man when formed. When we use the word formed, we
mean the whole building being complete. The brain with all organs,
nerves, vessels, and every minutia in form with all materials found or
used in life.


BODY IN PERFECT HEALTH.

We look at it in perfect health which means perfection and harmony not
in part, but of the whole body. So far we are only filled with love,
wonder and admiration. Another period of observation appears to the
philosopher. We find partial or universal discord from the lowest
observable to the highest in action and death. Then the book of whys is
opened and displays its leaves which calls out mental labor even to the
degree of agony, to know the cause or causes that produce a failure of a
limb in sensation, motion, nutrition, voluntary and involuntary
functional exhibits. His mind will explore the bone, the ligament, the
muscle, the fascia, the channels through which the blood travels from
heart to local destiny, with lymphatics and their contents,--the nerves,
the blood vessels and every channel through or over which all substances
are transmitted all over the body, particularly the disabled limb in
question. It proceeds too and does obtain blood abundantly to and from
the heart, but the results obtained are not satisfactory, and another
leaf is opened of why no good results are obtained and where is the
mystery, what quality and element of force and vitality has been
withheld? A thought strikes him that the cerebro spinal fluid is the
highest known element that is contained in the human body, and unless
the brain furnishes this fluid in abundance a disabled condition of the
body will remain. He who is able to reason will see that this great
river of life must be tapped and the withering field irrigated at once,
or the harvest of health be forever lost.


CHEMISTRY.

As chemical compounds are not known to Osteopathy to be used as
remedies, then its use as a study for the student is only to teach that
elements in nature do combine and form other substances, and without
changes and unions, no teeth, bone, hair, or muscle could appear in the
body from the food eaten. Then chemistry is of great use as a part of a
thorough Osteopathic education. It gives us the reasons why food is
found in the body as bone, muscle and so on, to all kinds of flesh,
teeth and bones found in animal forms. Unless we know chemistry
reasonably well, we can not do away with much mental worry of what
becomes of food after eating. By chemistry the truths of physiology are
firmly established in the mind of the student of nature, that in man a
chemistry of wonderful powers does all the work of animal forms, and
that in the laboratory of nature's chemistry is the ruling power. By
elementary chemistry we are led to see the beauties of physiology only.
Thus chemistry of the elementary is one, and physiology is the witness
that it is law in man as in all nature. Thus in chemistry we comprehend
some of the laws of union in nature which we can use mentally with
knowing confidence. In chemistry we become acquainted with the law of
cause and change in union, which is a standard law sought by the student
of Osteopathy.


NATURE'S CHEMISTRY.

Osteopathy believes that all parts of the human body do work on chemical
compounds, and from the general supply manufacture for local wants; thus
the liver builds for itself of the material that is prepared in its own
division laboratory. The same of heart and brain. No disturbing or
hindering causes will be tolerated to stay if an Osteopath can find and
remove it. We must reason that to withhold the supply from a limb, to
wither away would be natural. We suffer from two causes. First, want of
supply (hunger), and the burdens of dead deposits along nerve centers,
which five nerves by chemical changes while in fermentation should
regulate local or general divisions.


CORRECT METHOD OF REASONING.

In concluding this chapter we will confine our labor to an effort to
direct the beginner to a correct method of reasoning. When he is brought
face to face with the stern realities of the "sick room," the Osteopath
begins his inquiries and follows with his questions just far enough to
know what division of the body is in trouble. If he finds an arm has
lost motion, he goes to arm to explore for cause. He can begin his hunt
for cause at hand, explore it carefully for wounds, strains or any
lesion that could injure nerves of the arm. If he finds no probable
cause there, he should explore bones for dislocations or strains of
ligaments at elbow; if he finds no defect there sufficient to locate
cause in lower arm or hand; he has only two more places left to inspect,
the shoulder and neck with their articulations of bone and muscles. If
found normal at shoulder, then go to neck, out of which go all or most
of the nerves of the arm; if he finds no lesion or cause equal to the
trouble so far, then he has been careless in his search and should go
over and over from marrow to periostium of all bones of the neck and
head, because there are only five divisions in which a lesion can exist.
Carefully look, think, feel and know that the head of the humerus is
true in the glenoid cavity, clavicle true at both ends of its
articulation, with sternum and acromion processes. See that the biceps
are in their grooves, and ribs on spine are true at manubrium and spine,
and that neck is true on first dorsal. True in all joints of the neck,
as the nerves of the arm come from the neck, there must be no variation
from normal, or trouble will appear from that cause. As the neck has
much to do with the arm, we should keep a living picture of the forms of
each bone, how and where it articulates with others, how it is joined by
ligaments, what blood vessels, nerves and muscles cross or range with it
lengthwise, because to overlook a small nerve and blood vessel you may
fail to remove a goitre, and all diseases of the head, face and neck.




CHAPTER III.

THE HEAD.

     A Free Circulation--Death Blows--Something of the Neck--Order of
     Treatment--The Pelvis--Brains of Animals--Arterial Motion--Mental
     Vibrations--Overburdening the Mind--Hemiplegia.


A FREE CIRCULATION.

Before we treat of the head, we must follow blood from the heart to all
organs of the head. Not only look at the pictures in Gray, Morris,
Gerrish, or some finely illustrated work on anatomy, but we must apply a
searching hand and know to a certainty that the constrictors of neck, or
other muscles or ligaments do not pull cervical and hyoid bones so close
as to bruise pneumogastric or any other nerves or fibres that would
cause spasmodic contraction of digastric, stylo-hyoid or the whole
remaining group of neck muscles and ligaments, with which you are or
should be very familiar. Ever remember that the venous drainage must be
kept normally active or congestion, and tumefaction, with inflammation
of the glands of the head, face and neck will appear, and mark for you
this oversight; because the perpetual health, ease and comfort of the
head beginning with the scalp and hair, with their nerves, glands and
purity of blood supply, a healthy eye, good hearing, healthy action of
brain with its magnetic and electric forces to the vital parts which
sustain life, memory and reason, depend directly and wholly upon
unlimited freedom of the circulatory system of nerves, blood and
cerebral fluid. They must be normal in action and quantity
unembarrassed, otherwise bad hearing, ulcers of the ears, cross eyes,
pterygium, cataract, granulated lids, staphyloma, lachrymosis and up to
full list of diseases of the eye, with tonsilitis, injured voice, tumors
and cancers of face, head, tongue, mouth and throat, along with
erysipelas, blotches and pimples, and all diseases of the glandular
system of the head and neck. Undoubtedly all these afflictions have
their origin in obstructed normal action between the heart and the
termination of all above it, for want of nerve and blood harmony.


DEATH BLOWS.

Remember that death blows are dealt out freely above the sternum by
irritation and constriction of the parts above described. We should
often refresh our minds, beginning with the muscles that connect the
head and neck, and know to a certainty as we explore that junction that
the capitas minor, major and lateralis, long and short of both anticus
and posticus regions are indisputably normal to your hand and judgment.
It is almost useless to say to the anatomist who has had the drilling in
all branches of that science, previous to obtaining his diploma, to
commence and detail the venous and excretory system, through which all
those glands are drained, and kept in a healthy condition, but we say
this much; let your morning, noon and evening prayer be this, Oh Lord!
give me more anatomy each day I live, because experience has taught me
the unavoidable demands when in the "sick room."


SOMETHING OF THE NECK.

Before you leave that wisely constructed neck, I want to press and
imprint on your minds in the strongest terms that the wisest anatomist,
and physiologist, the oldest and most successful Osteopath knows only
enough of the neck, and its wondrous system of nerves, blood and muscles
and its relation to all above and below it, to say, "From everlasting to
everlasting thou art great, O Lord God Almighty!" Thy wisdom is surely
boundless, for I see that man must be wise to know all about the neck,
for we find by a twist of neck, we may become blind, deaf, spasmodic,
lose speech and memory, and all that is known as the joys of man. On
that division of the body all action of arms, legs, chest and all
muscles get their life--power and motion. Think for a moment of the
thousands and tens of thousands of large and small fluid vessels that
pass to and from heart and brain, to every organ, bone, fibre, muscle
and gland, both large and small, receiving and appropriating the
substances as prepared in the chemical laboratory; so wisely situated,
and so exact in all its works in the production and application of all
substances in the body.


ORDER OF TREATMENT.

The reader will begin with the brain or head because I want to start
with the head; first give such diseases as belong to that division of
the body. Then the neck, chest, abdomen and pelvis. Thus we have five
divisions in regular order, beginning with the head and finishing with
the sacrum. The reader will find diseases of eye, ear, tongue, nose,
face, scalp and hair under the chapter treating of the head. Next in
regular order will be the division of the neck, with diseases of tonsils
and glands of neck, swallow, trachae, nerves, blood vessels and muscles,
fascia and lymphatics, superior cervical ganglion and other nerves of
the neck, as they affect vitality in diseases. Then we pass on to third
division, with diseases of lung, heart, pericardium, and pleura, with
all parts of chest. Then abdomen, liver, stomach and bowels, and all
organs with resisting power of diaphragm. Fifth, pelvis, with its great
supply of nerves, blood and other fluids. These give us cause to halt
and seat the mind for a long season of observation. A great field opens
at this point for the observing thinker.


THE PELVIS.

In the pelvis we find a system of nerves and arteries with blood for
local supply, besides blood to construct womb, bladder, rectum, colon,
cellular system and all the muscles of that cavity (the pelvis) all of
which comes from arteries and branches above. We think it is not
necessary to name them only in bulk, to a student versed in anatomy.
Perhaps less is known of the pelvic system and its functions than any
division of the body, and for that reason I have felt that we should
know all that is possible to be learned. I believe more ignorance
prevails to-day of internal causes of diseases than would if we reasoned
that the pelvic nerves and vessels had much to do in forming the
abdominal viscera.


THE BRAIN OF ANIMALS.

Of all parts of the body of man to be well studied, the brain should be
the most attractive. It is the place where all force centers, where all
nerves connect to one common battery. By its orders the laboratory of
life begins to move on crude material and labors until blood is formed
and becomes food for all nerves first; then arteries and veins by nerve
action and forces, to suit each class of work to be done by that set of
nerves which is to construct forms; keep blood constantly in motion by
the arteries and from all parts back to the heart, through the veins,
that the blood may be purified, renewed and re-enter the arteries to be
taken to all places of need.


ARTERIAL MOTION.

Arterial motion is normal during all ages, from the quick pulse of the
babe's arm, to the ages of each year to one hundred or more. At this
great age the pulse is so slow that the heat is not generated by the
nerves, whose motor velocity is not great enough to bring electricity to
the stage of heat. All heat, high and low, surely is the effect of
active electricity--plus to fever; minus to coldness. When an irritant
enters the body by lung, skin or any other way, a change appears in the
heart's action from its effects on the brain, to the high electric
action and that burning heat called fever. If plus violent type (yellow
fever), if minus, low grades (typhus, typhoid, plagues), and so on
through the list.


MENTAL VIBRATIONS.

To think implies action of the brain. We can grade thought although we
cannot measure its speed.

Suppose a person of one kind of business thinks just fast enough to suit
that profession. A man is engaged in raising hogs and that alone. He
must reason on and of the nature of hogs. He begins about so: a hog
eats, drinks, bathes, roots and sleeps. He knows the hog eats grain, so
he feeds it corn, or some other suitable cereal, with plenty of water
and good bedding. The swine is on his mind night and day.


THE WHEELS OF THOUGHT.

Now the question is, how fast does he think? How many revolutions do the
wheels of his head make per minute to do all the necessary thinking
connected with the hog business? Say his mental wheels revolve 100 times
each minute. Then he adds sheep to his business, and if that should
require 100 more revolutions and he takes charge of raising draft horses
with 175 revolutions added, you see the wheels of his head whizzing off
375 vibrations per minute. And at this time he adds the duties of the
carpenter with 300 more revolutions, add them together and you see 675.
To this number he adds the duties and thoughts of a sheriff, which are
numerous enough to buzz his wheels at 1500 more, you find 2175 to be
his mental revolutions so far. Now you have the great physical demands
added to the mental motion which his brain has to support, yet he can do
all so far, fairly well.


OVERBURDENING THE MIND.

He now adds to his labors the manufacturing of leather, from all kinds
of hides, with the chemistry of fine tanning, which is equal to all
previous mental motions. Add and you find 4250 revolutions all drawing
on his brain each minute of the day. Add to this mental strain the
increased action of his body which has to perform these duties and you
see the beginning of a worry of both mind and body, to which you add
manufacturing of engines, iron puddling, rolling, etc.; a delegate to a
national convention, thoughts of the death of a near relative; add to
this a security debt to meet during a money panic. By this time the mind
begins to fag below the power of resistance.


HEMIPLEGIA.

Duration of such great mental vibrations for so long stops nutrition of
all or one-half of the brain, and we have a case of "Hemiplegia," or the
wheels of one-half of the brain run so fast as to overcome some fountain
of nerve force and explode some cerebral artery in the brain and deposit
a clot of blood at some motor supply or plexus.

Thus we see men from over mental action fall in our National councils,
courts, manufactories, churches, and almost all places of great mental
activity. Slaves and savages seldom fall victims to paralysis of any
kind, but escape all such, for they know nothing of the strains of mind
and hurried nutrition. They eat and rest, live long and happy. The idea
of riches never bothers their slumbers. Physical injuries may and often
do wound motor, sensory and nutrient centers of brain; but the effect is
just the same, partial or complete suspension of the motor and sensory
systems.

If you burst a boiler by high pressure or otherwise, your engine ceases
to move. And just the same of an over-worked brain or body.

Hemiplegia. "The half" and "I strike." Paralysis of one half of the
body.[2]

[Footnote 2: Chambers.]

Hemiplegia is usually the result of a cerebral hemorrhage or embolism.
It sometimes occurs suddenly without other marked symptoms, but commonly
it is ushered in by an apoplectic attack and on return of consciousness
it is observed that one side of the body is paralyzed, the paralysis
being often profound in the beginning, and disappearing to a greater or
less extent at a later period.

Hemiplegia is much more rarely produced by a tumor. It then generally
comes on slowly, the paralysis gradually increasing as the neoplasm
encroaches more and more upon the motor tracks, though the tumor may be
complicated by the occurrence of a hemorrhage and a sudden hemiplegia.

A gradual hemiplegia may also be produced by an abcess or chronic
softening of the brain substance. Other conditions or symptoms
presented, will in such case, assist us to diagnose the nature of the
lesion.




CHAPTER IV.

EAR WAX AND ITS USES.

     Nature Makes Nothing in Vain--A Successful Experiment--A Question
     for Ages--The Position--Meaning of Life--Some Questions
     Asked--Condition in Certain Diseases Caused by Cold--Cerumen in
     Fluid State--Winter Kills Babies--Some Advice to Mothers--A Case in
     Point--Connection of the brain and Other Nerves in
     Digestion--Unaided Investigation.


NATURE MAKES NOTHING IN VAIN.

That nature makes nothing in vain is an established truth in the minds
of all persons whose observation has created in such persons a desire to
reason, and that being my faith for many years I asked myself to try and
get a reason of why nature had made and placed in a person's head so
much fine machinery just to make a little ear-wax. If nothing is made in
vain, what is that bitter stuff made for? It is always there, and more
being made all the time. I have read many authors or say so's about
ear-wax, and about the best the wise or the unwise have said is that it
would keep bugs and other insects out of our heads. I thought if that
was all that it was made for nature had done a great deal to shoo off
the bugs. The idea that it was made bitter and bad to eat just to make
bugs sick was weak philosophy, if nature never did any useless work or
made anything in vain. At this time I saw the doors all open and a good
chance for the loaded mind to unload and give us other uses for ear-wax
than bug food, and to lubricate the auditory nerves with dry wax. At
this time of my desire to know some positive use or object that nature
had in forming so much fine machinery and no use for its products when
made, but to pull out of the head with a hairpin, I reasoned about so,
that this dry hard wax was once in the gaseous or fluid state.


A SUCCESSFUL EXPERIMENT.

When I had about concluded to sit down with the common herd of doctors
and say that wax was wax, a fat boy of two summers was reported to me to
be dying with croup. I began to think more about the dry wax that is
always found in cases of croup, sore throat, tonsilitis, pneumonia, and
all diseases of the lungs, nose and head. On examination I found the
ear-wax dried up. So I put a few drops of glycerine, and after a
minute's time a few drops of warm water in the child's head, and kept a
wet rag corked into its ear frequently for twelve hours, and gave it
Osteopathic treatment, at the end of which time all signs of croup had
disappeared. I used the glycerine to soften the wax, which combining
with water formed a harmless soap better qualified for washing the ear,
and retaining the wax in solution than anything I have tried, for it is
my opinion that the ear wax should be kept in a fluid state. When in
that state the absorbent can more readily take it up and use it in the
economy of life in this condition. The same day two ladies came to my
house, sore in lungs, necks tied up, sore throats, fever and headache.
As an experiment, in addition to Osteopathic treatment, I put a few
drops of glycerine in their ears, followed with water to wet and soften
the wax which was dry and hard, to get it back to a fluid state. Both
got better of their sore lungs and throats in a short time, and in
twenty-four hours they were about well, and lungs coughing out phlegm,
easily. From this I think that the cause of croup is simply the result
of abnormality of the cerumen system.


A QUESTION FOR AGES.

As a question of the uses of ear-wax has been before man for ages
without an answer being given that passes the line of conjecture, I
think there could be no reason why a few looks through the field glass
of inquiry should not be given in a limited way on that great plane of
fertility, for the minds of our most profound thinkers. As far as the
writer can learn from reading and other methods of inquiry, the power
and use of ear-wax has never been known, looked on, or thought of as one
of life's agents for good or bad health. One asks this question: "Why
are you talking about ear-wax, the filthy stuff?" In answer I asked,
"What do you know about ear-wax?" The answer, "I don't know or care
anything about the dirty stuff."


THE POSITION.

As my spleen is my organ of mirth, I let it bounce against my side a few
times at such ignorance and gave the wax subject more study than ever--I
began to read all the books I could find on Anatomy, Physiology, and
Histology to get some knowledge of the machinery that the wise architect
of that greatest of all temples had made to generate wax. At this time a
conviction came to me to be sure of its uses before I gave an opinion. I
find the center of nerve supply of the ears located at the base of the
brain and side of the head, in front of the cerebellum, just below and
near the center of the brain, a little above the foramen magnum, close
to and behind the carotid arteries, deep and superficial, just above the
entry of the spinal cord to the brain. Thus it is situated directly in
communication with all nerves to and from the brain to every part of the
body. Another question, and another came only to come and go without an
answer--such as how and where is this wax made? Of what use is it? Why
so awful bitter? Has it any living principle above dry earth? Is it
produced in the brain, lymphatics, fascia, heart, lungs, nerves or
where? How much of it would kill a man? Would it kill at all? What is it
made for? Is it used by nerves as food, or used by lungs, heart, or any
organ as an active principle in the magnetic or electric forces? So far
all authors are silent even to offer a speculative opinion about how it
is made and its uses. So far we get nothing from the ancient or modern
writers, as to its uses or anything that would cause a man to think that
the Creator had any great design, when he made so wisely constructed and
so much machinery and gave it such prominent place in the center of the
brain. By this time the reader begins to mentally ask what does this wax
evangelist know about the wax and its uses? The writer wishes to observe
and respect all nature and never be too hasty. To carefully explore all,
and never leave until he finds the cause and use that nature's hand has
placed in its works, never overlooking small packages as they often
contain precious gems. I am sure no man of brilliant mind can pass this
milepost and not hitch his team and do some precious loading. At this
point my pen will give notice to all anatomists, histologists, chemists
and physiologists that I will give "no sleep nor slumber to their
eyes," until I hear from them an answer, yes or no to these questions:
For what purpose did God make ear-wax? Is it food or refuse? If food,
what is nourished by it? and how do you know your position is true and
undebatable?


MEANING OF LIFE.

Life means existence; existence means subsistence; subsistence means
something to subsist on, and of the degree of refinement to suit the
being or principle whose function is to do the skilled work which is
found marked on the tressle-board of the wisest of all builders, whose
work is absolutely correct in form and action, and beautiful to behold.
It calls out the admiration of man and God himself, who did say of man,
"Not only good, but very good."


SOME QUESTIONS ASKED.

I consider ear-wax one of the most important questions before the minds
of our physiologists. The first and only knowledge of which substance
begins with the observer's eye when he beholds the dry wax as it is
excreted and dropped into the cavities of the ears. A question
arises--and stands without an answer--is this substance which is
commonly called ear-wax, technically called cerumen, is it dead or is it
alive while in this form and visible? If dead, why, and how did it lose
its life? Why has it not been consumed if once a living substance? When
alive, is it in the gaseous or fluid state? and when alive, and consumed
as nutriment by the system what does it nourish? is the question for the
philosopher's attention, not superficial, but his deepest thought? Why
is it deposited in the center of the brain if not to impart its vital
principle to all nerves interested in life and nutrition--both physical
and spiritual. Its location, itself, would indicate its importance.
Another thought is that no better place could be selected to establish
and locate a universal supply office for the laborers of all parts of
the whole superstructure. Another question arises: When we examine a
person paralyzed on one side, why do we find this bread of life in such
great quantities on the table and not consumed? Has not one-half of the
brain and the nerves of that whole side, limbs and all, lost their power
of digestion? Is hemiplegia a dyspepsia of the nerves of nutriment of
the brain and organs of that side? If so we have some foundation on
which to build an answer why this wax is not consumed and is dried up in
the ears of the parylytic. The answer would be that nutrition is
suspended.


CONDITIONS IN CERTAIN DISEASES, CAUSED BY COLDS.

Let us take croup, diphtheria, scarlet fever, la grippe, and all classes
of colds--on to pneumonia. They present about the same symptoms,
differing more in degrees of severity than of place. All affect the
tonsils, nostrils, membraneous air-passages, and lungs about the same
way. Croup exceeds by contracting the trachea enough to impede the
passing of air to the lungs; diphtheria has more swelling of the
tonsils, throat and glands of the neck, but all depend upon the same
blood and nerve supply, or a general law of blood beginning with
arteries to and from veins, lymphatics, glands and ducts to supply and
take away all fluids that are of no farther use to the vital and
material support. As all authors have agreed that the brain furnishes
the propelling forces to the nerves, it would be proper to inquire how
the brain is nourished. If so, we will begin and say the great cerebral
system of arteries supply the brain of which it gives quality of all
fluids and electric and magnetic forces, which must be generated in the
brain. Then a question arises, if the heart, lungs, liver, pancreas,
lymphatics, kidneys and all parts of the body depend upon the brain for
power, what do they give in return? If they give back anything it must
be of the kind of the organ from whence it comes; thus a kidney cannot
give liver nor spleen. Each must help to keep up the universal harmony
by furnishing its mite of its own kind. Suppose lung fever is the effect
of lack of renal salts, where would be a better place to dispatch from
to renal organs than the ears to reach the brain and touch the nerve
that connects with the sympathetic ganglion.


CERUMEN IN FLUID STATE.

Suppose we take the cerumen in its fluid state, by the secretions to the
lungs from the ears and see the action of air and other substances on
it, and it on them. We may safely look for a general action of some
kind. If it be magnetic food, we will see the magnetic power shown in
the lungs, and through the whole system, vitalizing all organs and
functions of life. Thus the lymphatics will move to wash out impurities,
and the nutritive nerves will rebuild lost energy. As but little is
known or said of how or where the cerumen is formed, we will guess it is
formed under the skin in the glands of the fascia and conveyed to the
ears by the secretory ducts. Its place and how it is manufactured is not
the question of the greatest importance, but its uses in disease and
health.


WINTER KILLS BABIES.

The writer has much reason to believe he has found a reliable pointer
for the cause of croup, diphtheria, and pneumonia; also a rational and
easy cure that any mother can administer and save the babe from choking
to death in her arms. Having witnessed croup in all its deadly work for
fifty years, and seen the best skill of each year and generation fail to
save, or even give relief, I lost all hope and grew to believe there was
no help and the doctor was only one more witness to the scene of death
and carnage found along the mysterious road that croup travels to slay
the babes of the whole earth. Of later days we have new and different
names for the disease, but alas, it kills the babe just as it did before
it was called diphtheria, la grippe and so on.


SOME ADVICE TO MOTHERS.

I write this more for the mothers than for the critics. We say to
mothers, as you are not Osteopaths, you are perfectly safe in putting
glycerine in a child's ears. It is made from oils and fats. I believe
when the wax is not consumed it clogs up the excretories with dead
matter, thus the irritation of the nerves of throat, neck, lungs and
lymphatics which give cause for the swelling of the tonsils and glands
of the neck. In this book can be found why I see wisdom in treating for
croup from the nerve centers of the brain. So far the uses and
importance of healthy ear-wax as a cure for disease has had no attention
that I can find by any author on disease or physiology. I hope time and
attention may lead us to a better knowledge of the cure of diphtheria,
croup, scarlet fever and all diseases of the throat and lungs of
children, and how to cure a greater per cent than has been up to this
writing. My experience up to date with such diseases, when treated as
indicated, has been very encouraging. Though it is but a short time
since I began to treat by this method, it has proven good with the young
and old.

As all authors so far seem silent even as to how or when the wax is
formed, we must resort to much careful dissection to find the relation
of the cerumen system to health. To intelligently acquaint the mother
with this treatment who does not understand anatomy so as to give
Osteopathic treatment for croup, diphtheria, and so on, I will say; take
a soft wet cloth and wash the child's neck and rub gently down from ears
to breast and shoulders; keep ears wet, often dropping in the glycerine.
Use glycerine because it will mix with the water and dissolve the wax,
while sweet oil and other oils will not do so.


A CASE IN POINT.

At 2 o'clock p. m. I called to see a babe having malignant croup in its
worst form, and examined its ears to see condition of wax. I had noticed
in consumptives that some cases had great quantities of dry wax in one
or both ears, but to this time had not thought of such deposits being an
evidence of lost or suspended action of the nerves that manufactured
cerumen. In this case I found wax dry and very hard, with much swelling
and hardness in region of ears, eustachian tubes and tonsils. I reasoned
that the excretory duct had become clogged, and that by the wax being
retained in ducts and glands an irritation of the nerves of the cervical
lymphatics had caused contraction near head, and produced congestion of
the lymphatics, of the pneumogastric, and cutting off nerves supply from
lungs. Believing this to be very likely I concluded to act on the above
line of reasoning and see if I could give some relief. I did not stop to
debate why the wax was hard and dry, but how to soften the wax, was the
question of interest to me then. So I proceeded. I reasoned that soap
and water would be the best treatment to clean the ears, and soften the
wax. At this point to select the best make of soap in the ears was to be
desired, so I took pure glycerine and water, dropped in a few drops and
took a small roll of cloth, made it wet in warm water and pushed it in
ears to keep them wet. In a few minutes I wet and inserted a soft cloth
cork in the child's ears. I twisted the corks around in the ears, each
time to mix the water and the wax to a softened condition, for to keep
the wax wet was the object. In a few minutes I got the wax wet and the
child coughed up phlegm easily, and when the dreaded hour, ten o'clock
at night came, all danger had passed.


CONNECTION OF BRAIN AND OTHER NERVES IN DIGESTION.

If digestion is the effect of organs, fluids and forces, then the
student of nature's law must be governed by well known truths, such as
the location of the brain, connection of the nerves to other organs,
bringing all parts interested in digestion in mental view. Thus you have
a chance to know if one organ has an assisting relation to any other
organ or system or if its products are of general or of special use. A
few questions at this point of inquiry would be in place. Does the brain
give assistance in digestion, and why may we reasonably suppose so, when
digestion does its work normally and has a full, rich supply of blood?
Yet disease enters the system, and begins its work with general
weakness, swelling, wastings, and pain with some, or all the glands
congested and sore, and a plenty of rich blood all the time. Then are we
justified to go to the brain and examine the electric and magnetic
batteries? We know such forces exist but as their location in the brain
is not known farther than the fact of their existence, we do not know
how they are fed, nor from where, so we are fully warranted in seeking a
use for both powers--magnetic and electric. One says the power of
electricity belongs more to the motor nerves and the magnetic to the
nutrient system; if not they are happily blended and give the results.
Without such forces life and motion could not be sustained. As it is not
my object to write a treatise on general physiology, I will turn at once
to the subject of the relation of life and health as affected by the
abnormal supply and action of ear-wax.[3]

[Footnote 3: "The secretion of the external auditory meatus, mixed with
the secretion of the neighboring glands or ceruminous glands, forms the
well known ear-wax or cerumen. The secretion in this place contains a
reddish pigment of a bitterish sweet taste, the composition of which has
not been investigated." American Text-Book of Physiology.]


UNAIDED INVESTIGATION.

As our investigations are without the assistance of ancient or modern
writers we will have to reason that man is a machine of form and power,
forming its own parts and generating its own powers as it has use for
them. At this time we begin to reason thus, that all powers are
invisible and we see effect only. We know such forces to be abundant in
nature, and life is sustained by them. To find the substances in the
body that causes them to act and how to act, has been the object of my
journey as an explorer. If they give us health when normal action
prevails and disease only when abnormal, then we are admonished to form
a more intimate acquaintance with the qualities, and with all the
products, when formed in this great laboratory which compounds and
qualifies each substance to fill its mission of force, construction,
purity and action.




CHAPTER V.

DISEASES OF THE CHEST.

     Where Confined--Consumption--Can Consumption Be Cured--Consumption
     Described--No Time for Surrender--Cerebral Spinal Fluid--How to
     Destroy Deadly Bombs of Decay--Battle of Blood for Life--Militis
     Tuberculosis--Conversion of Bodies Into Gas--Forming a
     Tubercle--Breeding Contagion--The Seeds of Disease--Generating
     Fever--Whooping Cough--Clouds and Lungs Are Much Alike--The Wisdom
     of Nature--Water Formed in Lungs--The Law of Fives--Feeble Action
     of Heart--The Heart--From Neck to Heart--Dyspepsia or Imperfect
     Digestion.


WHERE CONFINED.

Diseases of the chest are generally confined to heart, lungs, pleura,
the pericardium, mediastium, blood vessels, with nerves and lymphatics.
As we open the breast we behold the heart, a very large machine or
engine, situated conveniently to throw blood to all parts of the body.
To it we see hose or pipes that go to each organ, all muscles, the
stomach, bowels, liver, spleen, kidneys, bladder and womb, all bones,
fibers, ligaments, membranes, and its body, lungs and brain. When we
follow this blood through its whole journey to feed the dependent parts,
be they organ or muscle, we find just enough unloaded at each station to
supply the demand as fast as consumed. Thus life is supplied at each
stroke of the heart, which gives blood to keep digestion in full motion
while other supplies of blood are being made and put in channels to
carry to the heart, blood is freely given to keep those channels strong,
clean and active. Thus much depends on the heart, and great care should
be given to that study, because a healthy system depends almost wholly
on a normal heart and lung. Thus to study well the frame work of the
chest should be with the greatest care. Every joint of the neck and
spine has much to do with a healthy heart and lung, because all vital
fluids from crown to sacrum do or have passed through heart and lungs,
and any slip of bone, strain or bruise will affect to some degree the
usefulness of that fluid in its vitality, when appropriated in the place
or organ it should sustain in a good healthy state. To the Osteopath,
his first and last duty is to look well to a healthy blood and nerve
supply. He should let his eye camp day and night on the spinal column;
to know if the bones articulate truly in all facets and other bearings,
and never rest day or night until he knows the spine is true and in line
from atlas to sacrum, with all ribs known to be in perfect union with
processes of spine. In reasoning for probable causes of diseases of
chest, we are met with the fact that the heart and lungs are housed up,
and out of reach of the hand and eye. We hear a cough, see blood and
other substances after they pass out of the lungs; we learn of general
and local pain and misery, feel heat and cold on skin, note abnormal
breathing, but here we are at a stop, for want of facts. We know
something is wrong, but cannot say what, until after death has done the
work, then we open the chest and find tubercles, cancers, ulcers and
abcesses. How came they there? is the unanswered question. The servant
of that breast who failed to keep his room clean, is the one to find and
punish.


CONSUMPTION.

I believe so much death by consumption will soon be with the things of
the past, if the cases are taken early and handled by a skilled
mind,--one trained for that responsible place. He or she must be taught
this as a special branch. It is too deep for superficial knowledge or
imperfect work. Life is in danger, and can be saved by skill, not by
force and ignorance. He who sees only the dollar in the lung, is not the
man to trust with your case.

It is such men as have the ability to think, and the skill to comprehend
and execute the application of nature's unerring laws, that obtain the
results required. We believe the day has come, and long before noon, the
fear of consumption will greatly pass from the minds of people. We have
long since known and proven that a cough is only an effect. If an effect
then a wise man will set his mental dogs on the track, which is (effect)
to hunt the skunk, (cause). He has all the evidence by the cough,
location of pain, tenderness of spine, neck, and quality of the
substances coughed up to locate the cause, and to know, when he has
found it, how to remove the cause, and give relief; will grow more
simple as he reasons and notes effect. We do not think this result will
be obtained every time by even an average mind, unless he has a special
training for that purpose. He must not only know that the lungs are in
the upper part of the chest close to the heart, liver and stomach, but
he must know the relation all sustain to each other, that the blood must
be abundantly supplied, support and nourish three sets of nerves, namely
sensory, motor and nutrient; also voluntary and involuntary. If the
supply should be diminished on the nutrient nerves, weakness would
follow; reduce the supply from the motor and it will have the same
effect. Motion becomes too feeble to carry blood to and from lungs
normally, and the blood becomes diseased and congested, because it is
not passed on to other parts with the force necessary for health of
lungs.

At this time the nerves of sensation become irritated by pressure and
lack of nutriment, and we cough, which is an effort of nature to unload
the burden of oppression that congestion causes with sensory nerves. If
this be effect, then we must suffer and die, or remove the cause, put
out the fire and stop waste of life, without which all is lost. Nature
will do its work of repairing in due time. Let us reason by comparison.
If we dislocate a shoulder, fever and heat will follow. The same is true
of all limbs and joints of the body. If any obstructing blood or other
fluid should be deposited in quantities great enough to stop other
fluids from passing on their way, Nature will fire up its engine to
remove such deposits by converting fluids into gas. As heat and motion
have much to do as remedies, we may expect fever and pain until nature's
furnace produces heat, forms and converts its fluids into gas and other
deposits, and passes them through the excretories to space, and allows
the body to work normally again.


HOW CONSUMPTION USUALLY BEGINS.

We believe consumption causes the death of thousands annually who might
be saved. We must not let stupidity veil our reason, and we are to blame
if we let so many run into "Consumption" from a simple hard cough. The
remedy is natural, and we believe from results already obtained 75 per
cent can be cured if taken in time. What we generally call
"Consumption" begins with a cough, chilly sensations, and lasts a day or
two. Sometimes fever accompanies with cough, either high or low. The
cold generally relaxes in a few days, lungs get "loose," and much is
raised and continues for a period, but the cough appears again and again
with all changes of weather, and lasts longer each time, until it
becomes permanent, then it is called "Consumption," because of this
continuance. Medicines are administered freely and often, but the lungs
grow worse, cough more continued and much harder, till finally blood
begins to come from lungs with wasting of strength. Change of climate is
suggested and taken, but with no change for the better; another and
another travels to death on the same line. Then the doctor in council
reports "hereditary consumption" and with his decision all are
satisfied, and each member of the family feels that a cold and cough
means a coffin, because the doctor says the family has "hereditary
consumption." This shade tree has given comfort and contentment to the
doctors of the whole past.


CAN CONSUMPTION BE CURED?

If you have a tiresome and weakening cough at the close of the winter,
and wish to be cured, we would advise you to begin Osteopathic treatment
at once, so the lungs can heal and harden against next winter's attack.

This is the first I have written on "Consumption" because I wanted to
test my conclusions by long and careful observations on cases that I
have taken and successfully treated. I kept the results from public
print until I could obtain positive proof that "Consumption" could be
cured. So far the discovered causes give me little doubt, and the cures
are a certainty in very many cases. An early beginning is one of the
great considerations in incipient consumption.


CONSUMPTION DESCRIBED.

For fear you do not understand what I mean by "Consumption" I will write
on a descriptive line quite pointedly. I will give start and progress to
fully developed consumption. We often meet with cases of permanent
cough, with expectorations of long duration, dating back two, five, ten,
even thirty years, to the time they had measles. The severity of the
cough and strain had congested even the lung substances, and a chronic
inflammation was the result. If we analyze the sputa we find fibrin and
even lung muscle. Does all this array of dangerous symptoms cause an
Osteopath to give up in despair? It should not, on the other hand he
should go deeper on the hunt of cause. He may find trouble in nerve
fiber of pneumogastric nerve, atlas or hyoid, vertebra, rib, or
clavicle, may be by pressing on some nerve that supplies mucous
membrane of air cells or passages. A cut foot will often produce
lockjaw, why not a pressure on some center branch or nerve fiber cause
some division--nerve of the lungs that governs venous circulation which
would contract and hold blood indefinitely as an irritant, equal to
cause, perpetual coughing?


NO TIME FOR SURRENDER.

This is not the time for the brainy Osteopath to run up the white flag
of defeat and surrender. Open the doors of your purest reason, put on
the belt of energy and unload the sinking vessel of life. Throw
overboard all dead weights from fascia and wake up the forces of the
excretories. Let the nerves all show their powers to throw out every
weight that would sink or reduce the vital energies of nature. Give them
a chance to work, give them the full nourishment and the victory will be
on the side of the intelligent engineer. Never surrender but die in the
last ditch.

Let us enter the field of active exploration and note the causes that
would lead us to conclude we have the cause that produces "consumption"
as it has ever been called.

Begin at the brain, go down the ladder of observation, stop and whet
your knives of mental steel sharp, get your nerves quiet by the opium
of patience. Begin with the atlas, follow with the search-light of
quickened reason, comb back your hair of mental strength, and never
leave that bone till you have learned how many nerves pass through and
around that wisely formed first part of the neck. Remember it was
planned and builded by the mind and hand of the infinite. See what nerve
fibers passes through and on to the base center, and each minute cell,
fascia, gland and blood vessel of the lungs. Do you not know that each
nerve fiber to its place is king and lord of all?


CEREBRAL SPINAL FLUID.

I think consumption begins by closing the channels of cerebro-spinal
fluid in neck, which fluid stands as one of, if not the most highly
refined elements in animal bodies. Its fineness would indicate that it
is a substance that must be delivered in full supply continually to keep
health normal; if so, we will for experimental reasons look at the neck
ligated, as found in measles, croup, colds and eruptive fevers. Supply
is stopped from passing below atlas for three days. During such diseases
fever runs high at this time and dries up the albumen, giving cause for
tubercles to begin, as fever has dried out the water and left the
albumen in small deposits in the lungs, liver, kidneys and bowels. If
this view of the great uses of brain fluid is true as cause of
glandular growths and other dead deposits; have we not a cause for
militis tuberculosis? Have we not encouragement to prosecute with
interest, in the hope of an answer to the question, "What is
tuberculosis?" Our writers are just as much at sea to-day as a thousand
years ago. I will give the reader some of the reasons why I think the
mischief was started while fluid was cut off by congestion of neck. How
can the fluid be cut off at neck is a very natural question. By the
crudest method of reasoning we would conclude that from the form of the
neck, many objects are indicated, and the material of which it is
composed would give reason to turn all its powers of thought, to ask why
it is so formed, as to twist, bend, straighten, stiffen and relax at
will, to suit so many purposes? A very tough skin--a sheathe--surrounds
the neck with blood vessels, nerves, muscles, bones, ligaments, fascia,
glands great and small, throat and trachea. In bones we find a great
canal for spinal cord. It is well and powerfully protected by a strong
wall of bone, so no outer pressure can obstruct the flow of passing
fluids, to keep vitality supplied by brain forces, but with all the
guards given to protect the cord, we find that it can be overcome by
impact fluids to such degree as to stop blood and other fluids from
supplying lungs and all below.

The fluid we speak of comes from the skull, and when in process of
formation must not be disturbed until it has passed through all chances
of being injured by force, air or light. Thus the great need of walls to
hold the enemy outside the safety line. Such truths surely should
attract our attention when we explore for causes. We can analyze
material bodies but we have to stop at the life line for more knowledge.
Our boats have been in port over 6000 years, waiting for knowledge about
the whats and whys of life, until barnacles of ignorance have
accumulated to such thickness that the conchologist has called that cake
of shells "allopathy" which weighed anchor and turned to the great sea
of human credulity to expound, with nothing but conjectures to offer. He
toots his fog-horn in all lands and on all seas, and says, "age before
reason." Thus one generation blindly follows another.


HOW TO DESTROY DEADLY BOMBS OF DECAY.

I think by this time the reader has gotten his mind in line with his
exploring needle of thought to get some light or knowledge of why a
growth and how a body that has never failed for few or many years,
begins and continues to form and plant deadly bombs of decay in that
once powerful engine of perfect health, to produce suicide. We see and
know this to be the case in thousands of beings annually, and this same
question is just as applicable to the herds of animals as to man. Thus
we cry piteously for help, but no answer has come in past days; we go on
and give place in lungs and other parts of the deadly tubercle. But one
answer can be given in "Holy Writ" to suit these questions, "Cleanliness
is next to Godliness." Turn the waters of life loose at the brain,
remove all hindrances and the work will be done, and give us the eternal
legacy, LONGEVITY.


BATTLE OF BLOOD FOR LIFE.

In America from the day of Washington and all centuries before his time,
man has dreaded diseases of the lungs more universally than any other
one disease. If we compare pulmonary diseases with other maladies we
find more persons die of consumption, pneumonia, bronchitis and nervous
coughs than from smallpox, typhus and bilious fever and all other fevers
combined. Many diseases of contagious natures do not stay in city, town,
country nor an army, but a short time; kills a few and disappears and
may not return for many years. The same is the history of yellow fever,
cholera and other epidemics. They slay their hundreds and stop as
unceremoniously as they began. But when we think of diseases that begin
to show their effects in tonsils, trachea and lining membranes of the
air passages, we find we are in a boundless ocean; because we find all
seasons of the year, which afford changes of weather: Wet, dry, windy,
hot and cold, which mark 30 deg. to 60 deg. in twenty-four hours, chills
the lungs and whole system, closes the excretory system against renovating
equal to deposits, with all other chances to throw out dead matter and
gases that destroy blood and life in proportion to the amount and time
of abnormal retention.

It takes no great mind to know from past observation that a common cold
often holds on and settles down to chronic inflammation of the lungs,
and the patient dies of consumption, croup, diphtheria, tonsilitis, and
as catarrhal trouble stays and begins to waste vitality by failing to
oxygenize blood while in the lungs, diphtheria paves the way for the
young and old to die of consumption. Dance halls, opera houses,
churches, school houses, and all crowded assemblies never fail to
inspect and deposit the seeds of consumption in weak lungs.

As one delves deeper and deeper into the machinery and exacting laws of
life, he beholds works and workings of contented laborers of all parts
of the one common whole--the great shafts and pillars of an engine
working to the fullness of the meaning of perfection. He sees that great
quarter-master the heart, pouring in and loading train after train and
giving orders to the wagon-master to line his teams and march on quick
time to all divisions, supply all companies, squads and sections with
rations, clothing, ammunition, surgeons, splints and bandages, and put
all the dead and wounded into the ambulances to be repaired or buried
with military honors by Captain "VEIN," who fearlessly penetrates the
densest bones, muscles and glands, with the living waters to quench the
thirst of the blue corpuscles, who are worn out by doing fatigue duty in
the great combat between life and death. He often has to run his trains
on forced marches to get supplies to sustain his men of life when they
have had to contend with long sieges of heat and cold. Of all officers
of life, none have greater duties to perform than the quarter-master of
blood supply, who borrows the force with which he runs his deliveries
from the brain which give motion to all parts of active life.


MILITIS TUBERCULOSIS.

A tubercle is a separate body being enveloped.[4]

[Footnote 4: Chambers.]

As all descriptions of a tubercle in books amount to about this, that
the tubercle is an amount of fleshy substance which may be albumen,
fibrin, or any other substance collected and deposited at one place in
the human body, and covered with a film composed generally of fibrinous
substances, and deposited in its spherical form, and separated from all
similarly formed spheres by fascia. They may be very numerous, for many
hundreds may occupy one cubic inch and yet one is distinct from all
others. They seem to develop only where fascia is abundant; in the
lungs, liver, bowels and skin. After formation they may exist and show
nothing but roughened surfaces, and when the period of dissolution and
the solvent powers of the chemical laboratory take possession to banish
them from the system, it generally begins its labors at such time as
some catarrhal disease is preying upon the human system. Nature seems to
make its first effort for the purpose of disposing of such substances as
have accumulated at the catarrhal period. At which time it brings
forward all the solvent qualities and applies them with the assistance
of the motor force to drive out through the bowels, lungs, porous and
excretory system all irritable substances. Electricity is called in as
the motor force to be used in expelling all unkindly substances. By this
effort of nature, which is an increased action of the motor nerves,
electricity is brought to the degree of heat usually called fever, which
if better understood we would possibly find to be the necessary heat of
the furnace of the body being used to convert dead substances into gas
which can travel through the excretory system and be thrown from the
body much easier than water, lymph, albumen or fibrin.


CONVERSION OF BODIES INTO GAS.

During this process of gas burning, a very high temperature is obtained
by the increased action of the arterial system through the motor nerves,
permeating those tubercles and causing an inflammation of them by the
gaseous disturbance so produced; another effort of nature to convert
those tubercles into gas and relieve the body of their presence and
irritable occupancy.

As an illustration we will ask the reader if it would be reasonable to
expect to pass a common towel through a pipe stem. Nevertheless nature
can easily do it. Confine the towel in a cylinder and apply fire, which
in time will convert the towel into gas or smoke, and enable it to pass
through the stem. Is it not just as reasonable to suppose those high
temperatures of the body are nature's furnaces, making fires out of
those dead bodies, while passing them through the skin in order to get
rid of these great and small towels which are packed all through the
human fascia, and can only be passed from the body in a gaseous form;
the gas generated by heat.

The blackened eye of the pugilist soon fires up its furnaces and
proceeds to generate gas from the dead blood that surrounds the eye.
Though it may be considerable quantities under the skin, the blood soon
disappears leaving the face and eye normal to all appearances. No pus
has formed, nor deposit left, fever disappears, the eye is well. What
better effort could nature offer than through its gas generating
furnace. I will leave any other method for you to discover. I know of
none that my reason can grasp.


FORMING A TUBERCLE.

When reason sees a white corpuscle in the fascia not taken up as a
nutrient, it attaches itself to the fascia with all its uterine powers
during the time of measles or other eruptive diseases, and soon takes
form and is a vital and durable being whose name is tubercle; in form a
sphere, and place of foetal life is a cell in the fascia of life
giving power to all forms of flesh. Thus all tubercles are
unappropriated substances whom mother fascia has clothed and ordered in
camp for treatment and repairs, and placed them on the list of enrolled
pensioners, to draw on the treasury of the fascia, until death shall
discharge them.


BREEDING CONTAGION.

The mothers of the human race give birth to children from puberty to
sterility. She may give birth a dozen times, but nature finally calls a
halt, and the whole system of life sustaining nerves of the womb which
are in the fascia, with blood in great abundance to supply foetal
life, ceases to go farther with the processes of building beings.
Vitality for that purpose stops, never to return. Nature has no longer a
demand for her system to act as a constructing cause for other beings,
of her kind, and she is free the remainder of her days.

A question arises. Are children all she can develop in her system and
give birth to? No, she can go through other processes of breeding. In
her fascia there is one seed, if vitalized will develop a being called
measles. She never has but one confinement. That set of nerves that gave
support and growth to measles died in the delivery of the child, and
never can conceive and produce any more measles. Another seed lives in
her fascia waiting to be vitalized by the male principle of smallpox,
and when it is born it always kills the nerves that gave it life and
form. And the person never can have but one such child or being during
life.

Still another seed awaits the coming of the commissary to nourish while
it consumes that vitality in the fascia of the glands to develop the
portly child we call mumps. Both male and female conceive and give birth
to such beings, then tear up the tracks and roads behind them, by
killing the demand for such drink.

I want to draw the mind of the reader to the fact that no being can be
formed without material. A place in which to be developed, and all
forces necessary to do the needed work. And as all excressences and
abnormal growths, diseases and conditions, must have the friendly
assistance of the fascia before development; the fascia is the place to
look for cause of disease and the place to consult and begin the action
of remedies in all diseases, even though it be the birth of a child.


THE SEEDS OF DISEASE.

We can arrive at truth only by the powerful rules of reason, so the
philosopher has shouted from the house tops of all ages. He adjusts his
many supposable causes, adds to and subtracts until he arrives at a
conclusion based upon the facts of his observations. Knowing the
principles that exist in substances and seeds, by which when associated
with proper conditions that powerful engine known as animal life gives
the truth with fact and motion as its voucher. We reason, if corn be
planted in moist and warm earth, that action and growth will present the
form of a living stalk of corn, which has existed in embryo, and still
continues its vital actions as long as the proper conditions prevail, i.
e., until the growth and development is completed. If you take a seed
in your fingers, push it in the ground and cover it up, incubation,
growth and development is expected in obedience to the law under which
it serves. Thus we see to succeed we must deposit and cover up the seed
in order that the laws of gestation may have an opportunity by which
they get the results desired. As nature always presents itself to our
minds as seeds deposited in soil and season to suit, and it is loyal to
its own laws only, we are constrained by this method of reasoning to
conclude that disease must have a soil in which to plant its seeds
before gestation and development. It must have seasonable conditions,
the rains of nourishment, also the necessary time required for such
processes. All these laws must be fulfilled to the letter, otherwise a
failure is absolute. As the great laboratory of nature is always at work
in the human body, the chilling winds and poisonous breaths, with
extremes of heat and cold at different seasons of the year by day and
night, and the lungs and skin are continually secreting and excreting
every minute, hour and day of our lives, is it not reasonable to suppose
that we inhale many elements that are floating in the common winds that
contain the seeds of some destructive element, to the harmony of fluids
that are necessary to sustain the healthy animal forms.


GENERATING FEVER.

Suppose it should start the yeast, or kind of substance that lives
greatly upon lime. If this yeast in its action and thirst for food to
suit its life and appetite should call in from the earth, water and
atmosphere for its daily food lime substances only, and by its power
destroy all other principles taken as nourishment, is it not reasonable
to suppose it would deposit such elements in over powering quantities in
the fascia of the mucous membrane of the lungs in such quantities, as to
overcome the renovating powers of the lungs and excretory system, by its
paralyzing quantities of diseased fluids, all through the universal
fascia of animal life. This deposit acts as an irritant to the sensory
nerves to such an extent that the electricity of the motor nerves is
forced to take charge of, and run the machinery of the human body, with
such velocity as to raise the temperature of the body, by putting the
electricity above the normal action of animal life, and thereby generate
that temperature known as fever?

The two extremes, heat and cold, may be the causes of retention and
detention. One is detained by the contraction of cold until the blood
and other fluids die by asphyxia. The warm temperature produces
relaxation of the nerves, blood, and all other vessels of the fascia,
during which time the arteries are injecting too great quantities of
fluids to be renovated by the excretory systems. Thus you have a cause
for decomposition of the blood and other substances, to be conveyed to
the lungs for purification and renewal. You have a logical foundation
and a cause for all diseases, catarrhal, climatic, contagions,
infections, and epidemics. The fascia proves itself to be the probable
matrix of life and death. Beginning with the mucous membrane penetrating
all parts to supply and renovate the fluids of life, and nourishing all
the nerves of nutrition and assimilation. When harmonious in normal
action, health is good; when perverted, disease is destructive unto
death.


WHOOPING COUGH.

I have perused all the authority obtainable, advised with and counciled
for information in reference to the cause of whooping cough until I am
constrained to think, whether I say so or not, that I have had many
additions of words during the conversation, and to use a homely phrase,
less sense than I started out with. My tongue is tired, my brain
exhausted, my hopes disappointed and my mind disgusted, that after so
much effort to obtain some positive knowledge of the disease in
question, which is whooping cough, that I have received nothing that
would give me any light whatever pertaining to the subject. It winds up
thus, that it may be a germ that irritates the pneumogastric nerve. I go
off as blank and empty as the fish lakes on the moon. I supposed writers
would say something in reference to the irritating influence of this
disease on the nerves and muscles that would contract or convulsively
shorten the muscles that attach at the one end to the os hyoid, and at
the other end at various points along the neck, and force the hyoid back
against the pneumogastric nerve, hypoglossal, cervical, or some other
nerve that would be irritated by such pressure on nerves by the os
hyoid, when pulled back and held against such nerves. The above picture
will give the reader some idea why I became so thoroughly disgusted with
the heaps of compiled trash. I say trash because there was not a single
truth, great or small, to guide me in search of the desired knowledge.
And at this point I will say on my first exploration I found all of the
nerves and muscles that attach to the os hyoid at any point contracted,
shortened and pulling the hyoid back to and pressing against the
pneumogastric nerve, and all the nerves in that vicinity. Also each and
every muscle was in a hard and contracted condition in the region of
this portion of the trachea, and extended up and into the back part of
the tongue. Then I satisfied myself that this irritable condition of the
muscles was possibly the cause of the spasms of the trachea during the
convulsive cough. I proceeded at once with my hand guided by my judgment
to suspend or stop for awhile the action of the nerves of sensation that
go with and control the muscles of the machinery which conducts air to
and from the lungs. That my first effort while acting upon this
philosophy was a complete relaxation of all muscles and fibers of that
part of the neck, and when they relaxed their hold upon the respiratory
machinery the breathing became normal. I have been asked what bone I
would pull when treating whooping cough? My answer would be, the bones
that held by attachment the muscles of the hyoid system in such
irritable condition that begin with the atlas and terminate with the
sacrum. To him who has been a willing student of the American School of
Osteopathy the successful management of whooping cough should be
absolute, reliable and successful in all cases, when taken for treatment
in anything like, a reasonable time.


CLOUDS AND LUNGS ARE MUCH ALIKE.

One is always the same in form and stays in the body of animals, while
the clouds, the lungs of the sky, are never the same in form. They are
sometimes very dense and separated from all others. Such are more
furious in display. Then we see the softer clouds which cover all
visible space above; they too give us rain but in a more quiet way and
are more extended in space; they shade the sun, and form water by
uniting oxygen and hydrogen, and supply vegetation and all demands for
water. Now we see and know the uses for the clouds or lungs of the sky,
and we are led to hunt and locate the water forming clouds of the animal
beings. As we behold above us the forming clouds we see great activity,
with darkness and attending shadows, without such shadows or darkness no
rain can form.

The lung of man, too, is in the shade, and surely like the clouds have
much to do with the air which contains both gases, which compose water
and other elements of life. With my power of reasoning, if the lungs do
not generate water and supply the human system through the secretions to
sustain life, and keep the body clean and healthy by the excretories, I
am at a loss to know why so much wind is taken into the body just to
blow out. One would say we live by the wind, and to cut it off we die.
At this point I will ask the question, Where and how do fishes get their
wind? If they can live on oxygen and hydrogen when united in the form of
water, is not this the strongest conclusion we can come to that the
lungs generate water of a purer quality than is found in the running
brooks or ocean?

Is it not reasonable to suppose that in the lungs can be found the
fountain from which water is conveyed to the lymphatics and other parts
of the body, to mix with the blood and keep it in proper condition while
in construction and processes of renovation? Then if this be true, have
we not established and located the fountain head and supply of the
nutrient waters of life? If so are we not justified in going to that
fountain for water to extinguish a fire that is consuming the body,
which we call fever? This heat never appears until the water supplying
the lymphatics is very much exhausted, previous to this exhibition of
heat; which the chemist would conclude was the result of the action of
phosphorous uniting with oxygen without hydrogen.

We as philosophical machinists, to extinguish this fire by every method
of reason, would be forced to go to the lungs, and place them in a
condition that they can generate water at once and supply the excretory
ducts, which will at the first pulsation of the heart throw water upon
the consuming fire, and extinguish it by uniting oxygen with hydrogen,
and cover the burning building with water by disabling the power of
phosphorous and oxygen from uniting and keeping up the flames of
destruction.


THE WISDOM OF NATURE.

For all my life previous to the day I spoke out with my conclusions of
the wisdom of nature as a very wise and careful mechanic, I had been
told that "God" was wise to a finish,--from my birth until I was
thirty-five years old,--when I saw that all work done by that law of
power and wisdom was absolutely perfect in all its requirements. In
vegetable life no power of human can detect a flaw or even suggest an
additional leaf, limb or fruit. I had made a long study of minerology in
which I found each stone or mettle was in a division of life that was
its own, and no other stone could appear dressed in its garb, from the
black silurian to the purely transparent crystal. I saw that a diamond
could not be a ruby, neither could it be an oak, a goose nor a goat.
With all the teaching which had given God credit for his perfect
construction, wisdom and ability in all nature, I reasoned that in
parching seasons that the sun's fires were put out, and a feverish earth
cooled by the falling dews of the clouds. I asked of my own reason if
there was not a cloud of water in the human body that could be caused to
drop its dews, put out the fires of fever, and save the forests of life
that were being burned every fall season.


WATER FORMED IN LUNGS.

I reasoned that water was made by the union of two gases, hydrogen and
oxygen,--then a question arose, Is it not fully in line with reason that
union of the two gases can and does occur in the lungs and form water,
that is taken up by the secretions carried to the lymphatics, and by
them to all of the system and stored away for use? Thus I reasoned, and
proceeded to seek nerve centers to cause the lymphatics to discharge
this water on such places and in quantities sufficient to reduce the
heat called fever. I succeeded, fevers vanished as with a magic touch,
and left the persons, both old and young, in their normal temperatures
without any difference as to kinds of fever to the complete list.

Our lungs are surely the half-way place between life and death. We are
told by chemistry that two gases make water for the uses of the body. Is
it not true that nature makes water in great quantities often for
special cases or conditions, for relief purposes, such as in asiatic
cholera, cholera morbus, chills and fever; when the contents of stomach,
bowels and skin run off many gallons of water, running through sheet and
mattress and on floor, not from kidneys but skin. Is it not plain to the
man of reason that the two gases, oxygen and hydrogen, do unite in the
lungs, form water and give supply to this great river of water that
washes life out in but a few hours in cases of cholera and other
diseases. The person is very cold at such times, breath and lung far
below the normal, and fully enough to condense gases to water.


THE LAW OF FIVES.

Lungs have five lobes, three on right lung, and two on left. Liver has
five lobes, three on right lobe, and two on left lobe. Nerves have five
qualities, nutrition, sensation, motion, voluntary and involuntary.
Nerves have five senses, seeing, hearing, feeling, smelling and tasting.
Since all principles differ in qualities or kinds of service, would it
be amiss for us to inquire a little farther why the lungs and liver are
provided with five divisions each, if not to do five kinds of work, and
different from all other kinds in many ways?


FEEBLE ACTION OF HEART.

I want to draw your attention to the facts that there is no method known
by which electricity or magnetic forces can be weighed. When we find the
nerves that connect the heart and lungs to brain limited by pressure
from twist or slip of neck, do we not see cause for croup? How would we
reason to convey electricity without a connected wire? Not at all, we
would know no electric force could reach to any point unless a continued
connection was made. Now to the point; suppose the vagus nerve should be
oppressed to a condition to cut off part of the electricity, would we be
surprised if the heart should be feeble in action. I think much of the
diseases of the "_heart_" are not of the organ but from a feeble supply
of electricity that is cut off in medulla or heart nerves, between heart
and brain. Why singing and roaring of ears in heart diseases, if there
is no waste of pectoral electricity?


THE HEART.

With the knife of reason in hand and the microscope of mind of the
greatest known power properly adjusted, we cut and lay open the breast
of man. Here we dwell indefinitely. This is the engine of life, the
self-propelling machine which has constructed all that is necessary to
its own convenience and comfort. It has brought and deposited its own
nourishment in the coronary arteries, whose duty is to construct and
enlarge the heart from time to time as its demands increase. We see its
main trunk of supply placed lengthways with the spinal column for the
purpose of constructing a manufactory of nutriment. We pass from the
heart upward about one foot, here we find it has constructed a battery
of force and sensation, and contains all power necessary to carry on
construction to the completed man.

In that brain or battery is found all the motor and sensory elements of
life, with nerves to transmit all nerve powers and principles found in
the human body. There is not a known atom in the whole human make-up
that has not been propelled by the heart through the channels by which
it has provided for such purpose. Every muscle, bone, hair, and all
other parts without an exception have traveled through this system of
arteries to their separate destinations. All are indebted to the heart
for their material size, and all qualities of motion and life sustaining
principles of the human body.

If the carotid artery should tire out and not be able to perform its
duty the brain would tire out also, and cease to operate. Should the
descending aorta come to a halt from any cause, all parts of the body
depending upon that vessel would suffer a total loss of blood supply.
Equally so with any other principal artery of limb or body, all mark a
failure equal to the suspended supply. The parts and principles of the
human body depending upon the heart are numerous beyond computation.
Every expulsive stroke of the heart throws into line armed and equipped
for duty thousands and millions of operators, whose duties are to
inspect, repair injuries and construct anew if need be from the crown of
the head to the sole of the foot. With the best eye of reason we see but
dimly into the breast of man which contains the heart, the wonder of man
and the secret of life.

I have given these bulky descriptions of the forest and ocean to
prepare the mind of man to begin the inspection of the machinery that
has constructed the body of which he is the indweller. If we cannot
swallow all, we can taste.


FROM NECK TO HEART.

The hearts of all animals should call the most careful attention of the
student of nature. He finds in it the first act of life; from it go all
parts or by it all parts of the body are made, and the student of nature
soon learns that at the heart he finds the first evidence of the power
of life to continue and give useful shape to matter. Its first work is
to complete itself in material form with necessary chambers to hold
blood and with tubes to convey to all places of need. He sees vessels
leaving the heart to form brain, lungs, liver, trunk and limbs, and with
each and all he can see the nerves of motion, sensation, nutrition, the
voluntary and involuntary--all working in perfect harmony and content to
do their part in the economy of life. Without that union in action a
confusion will show in form of abnormality which is known as disease. On
its work all nerves do depend for force and strength to build and
renovate the body in all its bones, muscles and nerves--thus all
channels to and from the heart must be cleared from all hindrance. No
nerve can do its part unless it be well nourished. If not it will fail
to execute its part for want of power--for by it all blood must move.
These nerves are found in plexuses in all parts of the body; they are
abundant in the skin, fascia, muscle, lymphatics and all organs great
and small. The Osteopath must know or learn that no infringement can be
tolerated in any part. Nature's demands are surely absolute, and require
that the last farthing shall be paid in full. Now for a start--we will
explore the neck; here we have the great and small occipital and the
cervical group all receiving from the brain and feeding parts below.
Thus we must stop at the neck and read the lessons that can be found
there, and learn them well; or we will find that we will not be able to
meet diseases only to be defeated. We must have the fight during the
four seasons of the year. In the cold seasons we will find lung and
other diseases--croup, pneumonia, diphtheria, sore throat. All these do
their mischief through the nerves of the neck.

Where is or who is the great thinker who knows and can tell all of the
duties and actions of the nerves of the neck, or what nerve failed and
slept while a tubercle was formed in the lungs? Which nerve slept while
fat is heaped up in useless piles in the body? Let us wake up!
Consumption does not come without a cause. What plexus is overcome and
allows the lungs to waste away? To what ganglion of the spine would the
finger of reason point, and say, "that is the cause of _phthisis
pulmonalis_?" In our search we find a division of nerves run from the
brain through the regions of the neck, and find a point at which a
branch leaves a greater nerve on a line that leads to the lungs. We will
likely find a ganglion at which place all or much of one or both lungs
are supplied. Then we, by reason, would see that freedom of action
cannot be. If some substance should intrude by pressure on any nerve in
that region, we must judge by conditions if that pressure has cut off
nutrition equal to feeble condition of the lungs.


DYSPEPSIA OR IMPERFECT DIGESTION.

In our physiologies we read much about digestion. We will start in where
they stop. They bring us to the lungs with chyle fresh as made and
placed in thoracic duct, previous to flowing into the heart to be
transferred to lungs to be purified, charged with oxygen and otherwise
qualified, and sent off for duty, through the arteries great and small,
to the various parts of the system. But there is nothing said of the
time when all blood is gas (if ever) before it is taken up by the
secretions, after refinement, and driven to the lungs to be mixed with
the old blood from the venous system. A few questions about the blood
seem to hang around my mental crib for food. Reason says we cannot use
blood before it has all passed through the gaseous stage of refinement,
which reduces all material to the lowest forms of atoms, before
constructing any material body. I think it safe to assume that all
muscles and bones of our body have been in the gas state while in the
process of preparing substances for blood. A world of questions arise at
this point.


QUESTIONS OF GAS.

The first is, Where and how is food made into gas while in the body? If
you will listen to a dyspeptic after eating you will wonder where he
gets all the wind that he rifts from his stomach, and continues for one
or two hours after each meal. That gas is generated in the stomach and
intestines, and we are led to believe so because we know of no other
place in which it can be made and thrown into the stomach by any tubes
or other methods of entry. Thus by the evidence so far the stomach and
bowels are the one place in which this gas is generated. Now comes
question two: As I have spoken of the stomach that generates and ejects
great quantities of gas for a longer or shorter time after meals, this
class of people have always been called dyspeptics. Another class of the
same race of beings stand side by side with him, without this gas
generating. He, too, eats and drinks of the same kind of food, without
any of the manifestations that have been described in the first class.
Why does one stomach blow off gas continually, while the other does not?
is a very deep, serious and interesting question. As number two throws
off no gas from the stomach after eating, is this conclusive evidence
that his stomach generates no gas? Or does his stomach and bowels form
gas just as fast as No. 1? and the secretions of the stomach and bowels
take up and retain the nutritious matter and pass the remainder of the
gas by way of the excretory ducts through the skin? If the excretory
ducts take up and carry this gas out of the body by way of the skin, and
he is a healthy man, why not account for No. one's stomach ejecting this
gas by way of the mouth, because of the fact that the secretions of the
stomach are either clogged up or inactive, for want of vital motion of
the nerve terminals of the stomach. Another question in connection with
this subject: Why is the man whose stomach belches forth gas in such
abundance also suffering with cold feet, hands and all over the body,
while No. 2 is quite warm and comfortable, with a glow of warmth passing
from his body all the time? With these hints I will ask the question:
What is digestion?




CHAPTER VI.

THE LYMPHATICS.

     Importance of the Subject--Demands of Nature on the
     Lymphatics--Dunglinson's Definition--Dangers of Dead
     Substances--Lymph Continued--Solvent in Nature--Where Are the
     Lymphatics Situated?--The Fat and Lean.


IMPORTANCE OF THE SUBJECT.

Possibly less is known of the lymphatics than any other division of the
life-sustaining machinery of man. Thus ignorance of that division is
equal to a total blank with the operator. Finer nerves dwell with the
lymphatics than even with the eye. The eye is an organized effect, the
lymphatics the cause; in them the spirit of life more abundantly dwells.
No atom can leave the lymphatics in an imperfect state and get a union
with any part of the body. There the atom obtains form and knowledge of
how and what to do. The lymphatics consume more of the finer fluids of
the brain than the whole viscera combined. By nature, coarser substances
are necessary to construct the organs that run the blast, and rough
forging divisions. The lymphatics form, finish, temper and send the
bricks to the builder with intelligence, that he may construct by
adjusting all according to nature's plans and specifications. Nature
makes machinery that can produce just what is necessary, and when
united, produces what the most capable minds could exact.

The lymphatics are closely and universally connected with the spinal
cord and all other nerves, long or short, universal or separate, and all
drink from the waters of the brain. By an action of the nerves of the
lymphatics, a union of qualities necessary to produce gall, sugar,
acids, alkalies, bone, muscle and softer parts, with the thought that
elements can be changed, suspended, collected and associated and produce
any chemical compound necessary to sustain animal life, wash out, salt,
sweeten and preserve the being from decay and death by chemical,
electric, atmospheric or climatic conditions. By this we are admonished
in all our treatment not to wound the lymphatics, as they are
undoubtedly the life giving centers and organs. Thus it behooves us to
handle them with wisdom and tenderness, for by and from them a withered
limb, organ or any division of the body receives what we call
reconstruction, or is builded anew, and without this cautious procedure
your patient had better save his life and money by passing you by as a
failure, until you are by knowledge qualified to deal with the
lymphatics.


DEMANDS OF NATURE ON THE LYMPHATICS.

Why not reason on the broad plain of known facts, and give the why he or
she has complete prostration. When all systems are cut off from a chance
to move and execute such duties as nature has allotted to them, motor
nerves must drive all substances to and sensation must judge the supply
and demand. Nutrition must be in action the time and keep all parts well
supplied with power to labor or a failure is sure to appear. We must
ever remember the demands of nature on the lymphatics, liver and
kidneys. They must work all the time or a confusion for lack in their
duties will mark a cripple in some function of life over which they
preside.


DUNGLINSON'S DEFINITION.

Dunglinson's scientific definition of the lymphatics is very extensive,
comprehensive and right to the point for our use as doctors of
Osteopathy. He describes the lymphatic glands as countless in number,
universally distributed all through the human body, containing vitalized
water and other fluids necessary to the support of animal life, running
parallel with the venous system, and more abundantly there than in other
locations of the body, at the same time discharging their contents into
the veins while conveying the blood back to the heart from the whole
system. Is it not reasonable to suppose that besides being nutrient
centers, that they accumulate and pass water through the whole secretory
and excretory systems of the body, in order to reduce nourishment to
that degree from thick to thin, that it may easily pass through all
tubes, ducts and vessels interested in distribution, as nourishment
first, and renovation second, through the excretory ducts. The question
arises whence cometh this water?


DANGERS OF DEAD SUBSTANCES.

This leads us back to the lungs as one of the great sources of which you
have been informed under the head of "Lungs, Gases and Water." With this
fountain of life saving water provided by nature to wash away impurities
as they accumulate in our bodies, would it not be great stupidity in us
to see a human being burn to death by the fires of fever, or die from
asphyxia by allowing bad or dead lymph, albumen, or any substance to
load down the powers of nature and keep the blood from being washed to
normal purity? If so, let us go deeper into the study of the life-saving
powers of the lymphatics. Do we not find in death that the lymphatics
are dark, and in life they are healthy and red?


LYMPH CONTINUED.

What we meet with in all diseases is dead blood, stagnant lymph, and
albumen in a semi-vital or dead and decomposing condition all through
the lymphatics and other parts of the body, brain, lungs, kidneys, liver
and fascia. The whole system is loaded with a confused mass of blood,
that is mixed with much or little unhealthy substances, that should have
been kept washed out by lymph. Stop and view the frog's superficial
lymphatic glands; you see all parts move just as regular as the heart
does; they are all in motion during life. For what purpose do they move?
if not to carry the fluids to sustain by building up, while the
excretory channels receive and pass out all that is of no further use to
the body. Now we see this great system of supply is the source of
construction and purity. If this be true we must keep them normal all
the time or see confused nature in the form of disease, the list
through. Thus we strike at the source of life and death when we go to
the lymphatics.

With this fountain of life-saving water, provided by nature to wash away
impurities as they accumulate in our bodies, would it not be great
stupidity in us to see a human being burn to death by the fires of
fever, or die from asphyxia, by allowing bad or dead lymph, albumen or
any substance to load down the powers of nature to keep the blood washed
to normal purity? If so let us go deeper in the study of the
life-sustaining powers of the lymphatics.


NATURE'S SOLVENTS.

The brain flushes the nerves of the lymphatics first, and more than any
other system of the body. No part is so small or remote that it is not
in direct connection with some part or chain of the lymphatics. The
doctor of Osteopathy has much to think about when he consults natural
remedies, and how they are supplied and administered, and as disease is
the effect of tardy deposits in some or all parts of the body, reason
would bring us to hunt a solvent of such deposits, which hinder the
natural motion of blood and other fluids in functional works, which are
to keep the body pure from any substance that would check vital action.
When we have searched and found that the lymphatics are almost the sole
requisite of the body we then must admit that their use is equal to the
abundant and universal supply of such glands. If we think and use a
homely word and say that disease is only too much dirt in the wheels of
life, then we will see that nature takes this method to wash out the
dirt. As an application, pneumonia is too much dirt in the wheels of the
lungs, if so we must wash out; no where can we go to a better place for
water than to the lymphatics. Are they not like a fire company with
nozzles in all windows ready to flush the burning house?


WHERE ARE THE LYMPHATICS SITUATED?

A student of life must take in all parts, and study their uses and
relations to other parts and systems. We lay much stress on the uses of
blood and the powers of the nerves, but have we any evidence that they
are of more vital importance than the lymphatics? If not let us halt at
this universal system of irrigation and study its great uses in
sustaining animal life. Where are they situated in the body? Answer by,
where are they not? No space is so small as to be out of connection with
the lymphatics, with their nerves, secretory and excretory ducts. Thus
the system of lymphatics is complete and universal in the whole body.
After beholding the lymphatics distributed along all nerves, blood
channels, muscles, glands and all organs of the body, from the brain to
the soles of the feet, all loaded to fullness with watery liquids, we
certainly can make but one conclusion as to their use, which would be to
mingle with and carry out all impurities of the body, by first mixing
with such substances and reducing them to that degree of fluids in
fineness, that could pass through the smallest tubes of the excretory
system, and by that method free the body from all deposits of either
solids or fluids, and leave nourishment.


THE FAT AND LEAN.

A question: Why is he too fat and she only skin and bone, while a third
is just right? If one is just right, why not all? If we get fat by a
natural process why not reverse the process and stop at any desirable
point in flesh size? I believe the law of life is simple and natural in
both respects if wisely understood. Have we nerves of motion to carry
food to all parts, organs, glands and muscles? Have we channels to
convey to all? Have we fluids to suit all demands? Have we brain power
equal to all force needed? Is blood formed sufficiently to fill all
demands? Does that blood contain fat, water, muscle, skin, hair and all
kinds to suit each division, organ, and nerve? If so and blood has
builded too much flesh, can it not take that bulk away by returning
blood to gas and other fluids? Can that which has been done be done
again? If yes be the correct answer, then we should hope to return
blood, fat, flesh and bone to gas and pass them away while in gaseous
condition, and do away with all unnatural size or lack of size. I
believe that it is natural to build and destroy all material form from
the lowest animated being to the greatest rolling world. I believe no
world could be constructed without strict obedience to a governing law,
which gives size by addition and reduces that size by subtraction. Thus
a fat man is builded by great addition, and if desired can be reduced
by much subtraction, which is simply a rule of numbers. We multiply to
enlarge, also subtract when we wish a reduction. Turn your eye for a
time to the supply trains of nature. When the crop is abundant, the
lading would be great, and when the seasons do not suit, the crops are
short or shorter to no lading at all. Thus we have the fat man and the
lean man. Is it not reasonable as a conclusion of the most exacting
philosophy that the train of cars that can bring loads of stone, brick
and mortar until a great bulk is formed, can also carry away until this
bulk disappears in part or all? This being my conclusion I will say by
many years of careful observation of the work of creating bodies and
destroying the same, that to add to is the law of giving size, and to
subtract from is the law of reduction. Both are natural, and both can be
made practical in the reduction or addition of flesh, when found too
great in quantity, or we can add to and give size to the starving muscle
through the action of the motor and nutrient system conveyed to, and
appropriated from the laboratory in which all bodily substances are
formed. Thus the philosophy is absolute, and the sky is clear to proceed
with addition and subtraction of flesh. I believe I am prepared to say
at this time that I understand the nervous system well enough to direct
the laboratory of nature and cause it through its skilled arts to
unload, or reduce, he who is over-burdened with a super-abundance of
flesh, and add to the scanty muscle a sufficiency to give power of
comfortable locomotion and other forces, by opening the gate of the
supply trains of nutrition.




CHAPTER VII.

THE DIAPHRAGM.

     Investigation--A Struggle With Nature--Lesson of Cause and
     Effect--Something of Medical Etiquette--The Medical Doctor--An
     Explorer for Truth Must Be Independent--The Diaphragm Introduced--A
     Useful Study--Combatting Effect--Is Least Understood--A Case of
     Bilious Fever--A Demand on the Nerves--Danger of Compression--A
     Cause for Disease--Was a Mistake Made in the Creation--An
     Exploration--Result of Removal of Diaphragm--Sustaining Life in
     Principles--Law Applicable to Other Organs--Power of
     Diaphragm--Omentum.


INVESTIGATION.

Let us halt at the origin of the splanchnic and take a look. At this
point we see the lower branches; sensation, motion, and nutrition, all
slant above the diaphragm pointing to the solar plexus which sends off
branches to pudic and sacral plexus of sensory system of nerves; just at
the place to join the life giving ganglion of sacrum with orders from
the brain to keep the process of blood forming in full motion all the
time. A question arises, how is this motion supplied and from where? The
answer is by the brain as nerve supply, heart as blood supply, all of
which comes from above the diaphragm, to keep machinery in form and
supplied with motion, that it may be able to generate chyle to send back
to heart, to be formed into blood and thrown into arteries to build all
parts as needed, and keep brain fed up to its normal supply of power
generating needs. We see above the diaphragm, the lungs, heart and
brain, the three sources of blood and nerve supply. All three are
guarded by strong walls, that they may do their part in keeping up the
life supply as far as blood and nerve force is required. But as they
generate no blood nor nerve material, they must take the place of
manufactories and purchase material from a foreign land, to be able to
have an abundance all the time. We see nature has placed its
manufacturies above a given line in the breast, and grows the crude
material below said line. Now as growth means motion and supply, we must
combine in a friendly way, and conduct the force from above to the
region below the septum or diaphragm, that we may use the powers as
needed. This wall must and does have openings to let blood and nerves
penetrate with supply and force to do the work of manufacturing.


A STRUGGLE WITH NATURE.

After all this has been done and a twist, pressure or obstructing fold
should appear from any cause, would we not have a cut off of motion to
return chyle, sensation to supply vitality, and venous motion to carry
off arterial supply that has been driven from heart above? Have we not
found the cause to stop all processes of life below diaphragm? In short,
are we not in a condition to soon be in a complete state of stagnation?
As soon as the arteries have filled the venous system, which is without
sensation to return blood to the heart, then the heart can do nothing
but wear out its energies trying to drive blood into a dead being below
the diaphragm known as the venous system. It is dead until sensation
reaches the vein from the sacral and pudic plexus.


LESSON OF CAUSE AND EFFECT.

Previous to all discoveries that have been made a demand for the
usefulness of such discovery, is felt and talked of for years, centuries
and cycles of time. Its discovery is an open question and free to all,
because in this fact all are interested. That lack may be felt and
spoken of by all agriculturists, and the inquiry directed to a better
plow, a better sickle or mowing machine with which to reap standing
grain. The thinker reduces his thoughts to practice, and cuts the grain,
leaving it in such condition that a raker is needed to bunch it previous
to binding.

His victory is heralded to the world as king of the harvest, and so
accepted. The discoverer says, "I wish I could bunch that grain." He
begins to reason from the great principle of cause and effect, and
sleeps not until he has added to his already made discovery, an addition
so ingeniously constructed that it will drop the grain in bunches ready
for the binder. The discoverer stands by and sees in the form of a human
being hands, arms and a band; he watches the motion then starts in to
rustle with cause and effect again. He thinks and sweats day and night,
and by the genius of thought produces a machine to bind the grain. By
this time another suggestion arises, how to separate the wheat as the
machine journeys in its cutting process. To his convictions nothing will
solve this problem but mental action. He thinks and dreams of cause and
effect. His mind seems to forget all the words of his mother tongue but
cause and effect. He talks and preaches cause and effect in so many
places that his associates begin to think he is mentally failing, and
will soon be a subject for the asylum. He becomes disgusted with their
lack of appreciation, seeks seclusion and formulates the desired
addition and threshes the grain ready for the bag. He has solved the
question and proved to his neighbors that the asylum was built for them,
not for him. With cause and effect which is ever before the
philosopher's eye, he ploughs the ocean regardless of the furious
waves, he dreads not the storms on the seas, because he has so
constructed a vessel with a resistance superior to the force of the
lashing waves of the ocean, and the world scores him another victory. He
opens his mouth and says by the law of cause and effect I will talk to
my mother who is hundreds of miles away. He disturbs her rest by the
rattling of a little electric bell in her room. Tremblingly the aged
mother approaches the telephone and asks "Who is there?" And is
answered, "It is me, Jimmie," and asks, "To whom am I talking?" She says
"Mrs. Sarah Murphy." He says, "God bless you, mother; I am at Galveston,
Texas, and you are in Boston, Mass." She laughs and cries with joy; he
hears every emotion of her trembling voice. She says to him, "You have
succeeded at last. I have never doubted your final success,
notwithstanding the neighbors have annoyed me almost to death, telling
me you would land in the asylum, because no man could talk so as to be
heard 1000 miles away; his lungs, were too weak, and his tongue too
short."

Now, friends, I have given you a long introductory foundation previous
to giving you the cause of disease, with the philosophy that I have
given upon cause and effect. I think it absolutely clear and the effect
so unerring in its results, that with Pythagoras I can say "Eureka."


SOMETHING OF MEDICAL ETIQUETTE.

To know we have found a general cause for disease, one that will stand
the heights and depths of direct and cross examinations, as given by the
high courts of cool headed reason, has been the mental effort of all
doctors and healers, since time began its record. They have had to treat
disease as best they could, by such methods as customs had established
as the best known for such diseases; notwithstanding their failures and
the great mortality under such a system of treatment. They have not felt
justified to go beyond the rules of symptomatology as adopted by their
schools, with diagnosis, prognosis and treatment. Should they digress
from the rules of the etiquette of their alma maters they would lose the
brotherly love and support of the medical association to which they
belong, under the belief that, "A bad name is as bad as death to a dog."


THE MEDICAL DOCTOR.

He says that in union there is safety, and resolves to stick to, live
and do as his school has disciplined all its pupils, with this command,
"The day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die. Stick to the
brotherhood."


AN EXPLORER FOR TRUTH MUST BE INDEPENDENT.

The explorer for truth must first declare his independence of all
obligations or brotherhoods of any kind whatsoever. He must be free to
think and reason. He must establish his observatory upon hills of his
own; he must establish them above the imaginary high planes of rulers,
kings, professors of schools of all kinds and denominations. He must be
the Czar of his own mental empire, unencumbered with anything that will
annoy while he makes his observations. I believe the reasons are so
plain, so easily comprehended, the facts in its support so brilliant,
that I will offer the same, though I be slaughtered on the altar of
bigotry and intolerance. This philosophy is not intended for minds not
thoroughly well posted by dissection and otherwise of the whole human
anatomy. You must know its physiological laboratories and workings with
the brain as the battery, the lungs as the source or machine that
renovates the blood from all impurities, and the heart as the living
engine or quarter-master, whose duty is to supply the commissaries with
blood and other fluids to all divisions and sub-divisions of the human
body, which is busily engaged producing material suited to the
production of bone and muscle, and all other substances necessary to
keep the machinery of life in full force and action.

Without this knowledge on the part of the reader, the words of this
philosophy will fall as blanks before reaching his magazine of reason.
Thus this is addressed to the independent man or woman that can, will
and does reason.


THE DIAPHRAGM INTRODUCED.

At this point we will introduce the diaphragm, which separates the
heart, lungs and brain from the organs of life that are limited to the
abdomen and pelvis. A question arises at this point; what has the
diaphragm to do with good or bad health? At this time we will analyze
the diaphragm; we will examine its construction, and its uses; we will
examine its openings through which blood passes both above and below. We
will examine the opening through which food passes to stomach. We will
carefully examine the passage or opening for nerve supply to the abdomen
below, to run this great system of chemistry, which is producing the
various kinds of substances necessary to the hard and soft parts of the
body. We must know the nerve supply of the lymphatics, womb, liver,
kidneys, pancreas, the generative organs, what they are, what they do,
and what are demanded of them, before we are able to feed our own minds
from the cup that contains the essence of reason as expressed from the
tree of life.


A USEFUL STUDY.

The diaphragm surely gives much food to the one who would search for the
great whys of disease as reported causes seem to be far back in the fogs
of mystery. It may help us to arrive at some facts if we take each organ
and division and make a full acquaintance of all its parts and uses
before we combine it with others.


COMBATTING EFFECTS.

In all ages, the Doctor has for lack of knowledge of the true cause of
diseases, combatted effects with his remedies. He treats pain with
remedies to deaden pain; congestion to wash out overplus of blood that
has been carried to parts or organs of the body by arteries of blood and
channels of secretions and not taken up and passed out and off by the
excretories. He sees the abnormal size and leaves the hunting of the
cause that has given growth to such proportions and begins to seek rest
and ease for his patient. Then he treats to reduce by medicine to carry
the waste fluids to bowels, bladder and skin, with tonics to give
strength and stimulants to increase the action of the heart in order to
force local deposits to the general excretory system. At this time let
the Osteopathic Doctor take a close hunt for any fold in muscles of the
system that would cause a cut-off of the normal supply of blood or
suspend the action of nerves whose office is to give power and action to
the excretory system sufficient to keep the dead matter carried off as
fast as it accumulates. Let us stop and acquaint ourselves with the true
condition of the diaphragm. It must be normal in place, as it is so
situated that it will admit of no abnormality. It must be kept
stretched, just as Nature arranged that it should, like a drum-head. It
is attached all around to the chest, though it crosses five or six ribs
on its descent from the seventh rib to the sternum at the lower point
and down to fourth lumbar vertebra. It is a continuous slanting floor,
above bowels and abdominal organs, and below heart and lungs. It must,
by all reason, be kept normal in tightness at all places, without a fold
or wrinkle, that could press the aorta, nerves, oesophagus, or
anything that contributes to the supply or circulation of any vital
substance. Now can there be any move in spine or ribs that would or
could change the normal shape of the diaphragm? If so, where and why?


IS LEAST UNDERSTOOD.

The diaphragm is possibly the least understood as being the cause of
more diseases, when its supports are not all in line and normal
position, than any other part of the body. It has many openings through
which nerves, blood and food pass while going from chest to all parts
below. It begins at the lower end of the breast-bone and crosses to ribs
back and down, in a slanting direction to the third or fourth lumbar
vertebra. Like an apron, it holds all that is above it up, such as heart
and lungs, and is the fence that divides the organs of the abdomen from
the chest. Below it are the stomach, bowels, liver, spleen, kidneys,
pancreas, womb, bladder; also the great system of lymphatics of the
whole blood and nerve supply of the organs and systems of nutrition and
life supply. All parts of the body have a direct or indirect connection
with this great separating muscle. It assists in breathing, in all
animals, when normal, and when prolapsed by the falling in and down of
any of the five or six ribs by which it is supported in place, then we
suffer from the effects of suspended normal arterial supply, and venous
stagnation below diaphragm. The aorta meets resistance as it goes down
with blood to nourish, and the vein as it goes back with impurities
contained in venous blood, also meets an obstruction at the diaphragm,
as it returns to the heart through the vena cava, because of the packing
of a fallen diaphragm on and about the blood vessels that must not be
obstructed. Thus heart trouble, lung disease, brain, liver, womb, tumors
of the abdomen and through the list of effects can be traced to the
diaphragm as the cause.

I am strongly impressed that the diaphragm has much to do in keeping all
the machinery and organs of life in a healthy condition, and will try
and give some of the reasons why, as I now understand them. First, it is
found to be wisely located just below the heart and lungs; one being the
engine of the blood, and the other is the engine of the air. This strong
wall holds all substances or other bodies away from any chance to press
on either engine, while performing their parts in the economy of life.
Each engine has a sacred duty to perform under the penal law of death to
itself and all other divisions of the whole being, man. If it should
neglect its work of which it is a vital part, should we take down this
wall and allow the liver, stomach and spleen to occupy any of the places
allotted to these engines of life, a confusion would surely be the
result; ability of the heart to force blood to the lungs would be
overcome and cause trouble.


A CASE OF BILIOUS FEVER.

Suppose we take a few diseases and submit them to the crucial ordeal of
reason, and see if we do, or can find any one of the climatic fevers
that appear with its full list of symptoms and have no assistance from
an irritated diaphragm. For example take a case of common bilious fever
of North America. It generally begins with a tired and sore feeling of
limbs and muscles, pain in spine, head, and lumbar region. At this point
of our inquiry we are left in an open sea of mystery and conjecture as
to cause. One says, "malaria," and goes no farther, gives a name and
stops. If you ask for the cause of such torturous pain in head and back,
with fever and vomiting, he will tell you that the very best authorities
agree that the cause is malaria, with its peculiar diagnostic tendency
to affect the brain, spine and stomach, and administers quinine and
leaves, thinking he has said and done all.

Reason would lead seekers for cause of the pain above located to
remember that all blood passes first as chyme up to heart and lungs,
directly through the diaphragm, conducted through the thoracic duct,
first to heart, thence to lungs, at the same time rivers of blood are
pouring into the heart from all of the system. Much of it very impure,
from diseased or stale blood. Much of the chyle is dead before it enters
the great thoracic duct and goes to the lungs without enough pure blood
to sustain life. Then disease appears.

As a cut-off the diaphragm, when dropped front and down, and across the
aorta and vena cava by a lowering of the ribs, on both sides of the
spine; it would be a complete pressure over coelic axis, with liver
supply, renal, pelvic, to a complete abdominal stoppage. Then we have
over-due blood for other parts to send off dead corpuscles by asphyxia,
with no hope that it can sustain life and health of the parts for which
it was designed. Thus we know that nature would not be true to its own
laws, if it would do good work with bad material.


A DEMAND ON THE NERVES.

Why not reason on the broad scale of known fact, and give the "why" he
or she has complete prostration when all systems are wholly cut off from
a chance to move and execute such duties as nature has allotted to them.
Motor nerves must drive all substances to, and sensation must judge the
supply and demand. Nutrition must be in action all the time and keep all
parts well supplied or a failure is sure to appear. We must ever
remember the demands of nature on the lymphatics, liver and kidneys,
that nerves work all the time or a confusion for lack in their duties
will mark a cripple in some function of life over which they preside.


DANGER OF COMPRESSION.

At this time we see by all systems of reason that no delay in passage of
food or blood, can be tolerated at the diaphragm, because any
irritation is bound to cause muscular contraction and impede the
natural flow of blood, first through the abdominal aorta, and even to a
temporary, partial or complete stoppage of arterial supply to the
abdomen. Or the vena cava may be so pressed as to completely stop the
return of venous blood from the stomach, kidneys, bowels and all other
organs, such as the lymphatics, pancreas, fascia, cellular membranes,
nerve centers, ganglionic and all systems of supply of organs of life
found in the abdomen. Thus by pressure, stricture or contraction to the
passage of blood can be stopped, either above or below the diaphragm,
and be the cause of blood being detained long enough to die from
asphyxia, and be left in the body of all organs below the diaphragm.


A CAUSE FOR DISEASE.

Thus you see a cause for Bright's disease of kidneys, disease of womb,
ovaries, jaundice, dysentery, leucorrhoea, painful monthlies, spasms,
dyspepsia, and on through the whole list of diseases now booked as
"causes unknown," and treated by the rule of "cut and try." We do know
that all blood for use of the whole system below the twelfth dorsal
vertebra does pass through the diaphragm, and all nerve supply, also
passes through the diaphragm and spinal column for limb and life. This
being a known fact, we have only to use reason to know that an
unhealthy condition of the diaphragm is bound to be followed by many
diseases. A list of questions arise at this point with the inquirers
that must and can be answered every time by reason only. The diaphragm
is a musculo-fibrinous organ and depends for blood and nerve supply
above its own location, and that supply must be given freely and pure
for nerve and blood or we will have a diseased organ to start with; then
we may find a universal atrophy or oedema, which would, besides its
own deformity not be able to rise and fall, to assist the lungs to mix
air with blood to purify venous blood, as it is carried to the lungs to
throw off impurities and take on oxygen previous to returning to the
heart, to be sent off as nourishment for the system. It is only in
keeping with reason that without a healthy diaphragm both in its form
and action, disease is bound to be the result. A question from our side
of the argument is: How can a carpenter build a good house out of
rotten, twisted or warped wood? If he can, then we can hope to be
healthy with diseased blood, but if we must have good material in
building, then we should form our thoughts to suit the heads of
inspectors, and inspect the passage of blood through the diaphragm,
pleury, pericardium and the fascia, superficial, deep and universal.
Disease is just as liable to begin its work in the fascia and
epithelium as any other place. Thus the necessity of pure blood and
healthy fascia, because all functions are equally responsible for good
and bad results.


WAS A MISTAKE MADE IN THE CREATION?

At a given period of time the Lord said, "Let us make man." After He had
made him He examined him, and pronounced him good, and not only good,
but very good. Did He know what good was? Had He the skill to be a
competent judge? If He was perfectly competent to judge skilled arts His
approval of the work when done was the fiat of mental competency backed
by perfection. Since that architect and skilled mechanic has finished
man and given him dominion over the fowls of the air, the beast of the
field and fishes of the sea, hasn't that person, being or superstructure
proven to us that God, the creator of all things, has armed him with
strength, with the mind and machinery to direct and execute? This being
demonstrated and leaving us without a doubt as to its perfection, are we
not admonished by all that is good and great to enter upon a minute
examination of all the parts belonging to this being; acquaint ourselves
with their uses and all the designs for which the whole being was
created. If we are honestly interested with the acquaintance of the
forms and uses of the parts in detail by close and thorough examination
of the material, its form and object of its form, from whence this
substance is obtained; how it is produced and sustained through life in
kind and form. How it is moved, where it gets its power, and for what
object does it move? A demand for a crucial examination of the skull,
the heart, lungs, of the chest, the stomach, liver and other organs of
the abdomen is made. The septum of the brain, the pericardium of the
chest--the diaphragm of the abdomen which is a dividing septum between
the abdomen and chest. In this examination we must know the reasons why
any organs, vessel or any other substance is located at a given place.
We must run with all the rivers of blood that travel through the system.


AN EXPLORATION.

We must start our exploring boat with the aorta, and float with this
vital current; see the captain as he unloads supplies for the diaphragm
and all that is under it. We must follow him and see what branch of this
river will lead to a little or great toe, or to the terminals of the
whole foot. We must pass through the waters of the dead sea by the way
of the vena cava, and observe the boats loaded with exhausted and worn
out blood, as it is poured in and channeled back to the heart, with all
below the diaphragm. Carefully watch the emptying of the vena azygos
major and minor, with the veins of the arms and head all being poured in
from little or great rivers to the vena innominate on their way to the
great hospital of life and nourishment; whose quarter-master is the
heart; whose finishing mechanic is the lung. Having acquainted ourselves
with the forms and locations of this great personality we are ready at
this time after examination, and found worthy and well qualified to
enter into a higher class in which we can obtain an acquaintance with
the physiological workings separately and conjoined of the whole being.
At this place we become acquainted with the hows and whys of the
production of blood, bone and all elements found in them, necessary to
sustain sensation, motion, nutrition, voluntary and involuntary action
of the nerve system. The hows and whys of the lymphatics, the life
sustaining powers of the brain, heart, lungs, and all the abdominal
system, with their various actions and uses, from the lowest cellular
membrane to the highest organ of the body.


RESULT OF REMOVAL OF DIAPHRAGM.

When we consult the form of the cross-bar that divides the body in two
conjoined divisions and reason on its use, we arrive at the fact that
the heart and lungs must have ample space or room to suit their actions
while performing their functions. At this time a question comes up: What
effect would follow the removal of the fence between heart, lungs and
brain, above that dividing muscle, and the machinery that is situated
below said cross-bar? We see at a glance that we would meet failure to
the extent of the infringement on demanded room for normal work of heart
to deliver below lungs to prepare blood, and the brain to pass nerve
power to either engine above, and all organs below the diaphragm.


SUSTAINING LIFE PRINCIPLES.

The life of the living tree is with the bark and superficial fascia
which lies between the bark of the body of the tree, its periostium. The
remainder of the tree takes the position or place of secreting. Its
excretory system is first upwards from the surface of the ground, and
washes out frozen impurities in the spring, after which it secretes and
conveys to the ground through the trunk of the tree to the roots which
is like unto the placenta attached to mother earth, qualifying all
substances of constructing fiber and leaf, of that part of the tree
above the ground. Each year produces a new tree which is seen and known
by circular rings called annular growths. That growth which was
completed last year is now a stale being of the past and has no vital
action of itself. But like all stale beings its process is a life of
another order, and dependent upon the fascia for its life and cellular
action which lies under the bark, for its own existence as a living
tree. It can only act as a chemical laboratory and furnish crude
material which is taken up by the superficial fascia and conveyed up to
the lungs, and exchanges dead for living matter, to receive and return
to all parts of the tree, keeping up vital formation. With frost its
vital process ceases through the winter season until mother earth
stimulates the placenta, and starts the growth of a new being, which is
developed and placed in form on the old trunk. Thus you see everything
of animal growth as we would call them, is a new being, and becomes a
part of the next being or growth formed.


STALE LIFE.

Should this form of vitality cease with the tree another principle which
we call stale life takes possession and constructs another tree which is
just the reverse of the living tree, and builds a tree after its own
power of formulation from the dead matter, to which it imparts a
principle of stale life, which life produces mushrooms, frogstools and
other peculiar forms of stale beings, from this form of growth.

Thus we are prepared to reason that blood when ligated and retained in
that condition of dead corpuscles, and no longer able to support animal
life, can form a zoophyte and all the forms peculiar to the great law of
association, as tumefactions of the lymphatics, pancreas, liver,
kidneys, uterus, with all the glandular system, be they lymphatics,
cellular, ganglia or any other parts of the body susceptible of such
growths, below the diaphragm. Thus we can account for tubercles of the
abdomen and all organs therein found.


LAW APPLICABLE TO OTHER ORGANS.

This same law is equally applicable to the heart, lungs, the brain,
tissues, glands, fascia and all substances capable of receiving without
the ability to excrete stale substances.

As oedema marks the first tardiness of fluids we have the beginning
step which will lead from miliary tuberculosis to the largest known
forms of tubercles, which is the effect of the active principles of
stale life or the life of dead matter.


POWER OF DIAPHRAGM.

At this point we will draw the attention of the reader to the fact that
the diaphragm can contract and suspend the passage of blood and produce
all the stagnant changes from start to completed deadly tubercle. Also
the cancer, the wen, glandular thickening of neck, face, scalp, fascia
and all substances found above the diaphragm. In this stale life we have
a compass that will lead us as explorers from the North star, to the
South pole, the rising sun of reason, and the evening dews of eternity.
This diaphragm says: "By me you live and by me you die. I hold in my
hand the powers of life and death, acquaint now thyself with me and be
at ease."


OMENTUM.

The truth of the presentation of facts should be the principle object of
every person who takes his pen with a view to give the reasons why
certain witnesses' testimony are indispensable to establish supposable
or known truths. This being the case I have summoned before this court
of inquiry an important witness. He has now taken the oath to tell the
truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, of the case before
this court. His name is the Great Omentum. Mr. Omentum, state if you
know of any reason why or how by irritation from a misplacement of your
body or any of its attachments to or about the diaphragm, the spine,
stomach or other places that could cause irritation and thickening by
congestion of your own body to such degree as to impede the flow of
arterial or venous blood, over whose position you occupy much space from
the diaphragm downward? State what effect a falling down of the eleventh
and twelfth ribs on both sides of the spine with their cartilaginous
points turned inward and down; if they should draw the diaphragm down
and across your body? What would be the effect on circulation of the
blood, and other fluids on the kidneys and other organs of the abdomen
and pelvis? Would it not be the foundation for destructive congestion,
and abnormal growth? State if you know if any such ligation would cause
swelling by retention of blood in the spleen, liver, kidneys or other
organs of the abdomen and pelvis? Would it be reasonable to suppose that
you could perform your functions in office with any irritating condition
caused by prolapses of diaphragm? Would not an irritation of your
attachment to the diaphragm, spine or stomach be great enough to impede
the blood on its passage through the aorta to the abdomen, or impede the
flow of blood back and through the diaphragm? If so state how and why?




CHAPTER VIII.

LIVER, BOWELS AND KIDNEYS.

     Gender of the Liver--Productions of the Liver--A Hope for the
     Afflicted--Evidences of Truth--Loaded With Ignorance--Lack of
     Knowledge of the Kidney--How a Purgative Acts--Flux--Bloody
     Dysentery--Flux More Fully Described--Osteopathic Remedies--Medical
     Remedies--More of the Osteopathic Remedy.


GENDER OF THE LIVER.

Let us abruptly assume that the liver is the abiding placenta of all
animated beings. If this position be true we are warranted and justified
in the conclusion that the germs necessary to form blood vessels and
other parts of the body must look to the liver for the fluids in which
they would expect to construct in form and size. It seems to be nature's
chemical laboratory, in which are prepared by receiving chemical
qualities and quantities to suit the formation of hard and soft
substances, which are to become the parts and the whole of any organ,
gland, muscle, nerve, cell, veins and arteries. In evidence of the
probability of the truth of this position, we will draw your attention,
first to its central location between the sacral and cerebral nerve
centers. There it lies between the "stomach" the vessel which receives
all material previous to being manipulated for all nutrient purposes,
and the heart, the great receiving and distributing quarter-master of
all animal life. It supplies squads, sections, companies, regiments,
battalions, brigades and divisions--to the whole army, and all parts
that are dependent upon the nutrient system.


PRODUCTIONS OF THE LIVER.

The liver seems to be able to qualify by calling to itself all
substances necessary to produce gall. Its communications with all parts
of the body is direct, circuitous, universal and absolute. If pure it
produces healthy gall and other substances, and in fact when healthy
itself all other fluids are considered to be pure, at which time we are
supposed to enjoy good health and universal bodily comfort. With a
diseased liver we have perverted action which possibly accounts for
impure and unhealthy deposits in the nasal passage and other parts of
the body in their own peculiar form. Polypus of the nose, tumefaction of
lungs, lymphatics, liver, kidneys, uterus, and even the brain itself.
Suppose such deposits, composed of albumen and fibrin, prepared in the
liver should be deposited in the lining membranes of veins leading to
the heart, and by some other chemical action this accumulated mass
should come loose from the veins, would we not expect what is commonly
called clots enter the heart, and shut off the arteries, supplying the
lungs, stop the further circulation of blood and cause instantaneous
death called heart failure, apoplexy and so on? Is it not reasonable to
suppose that under those deposits that softening of arteries has its
beginning, which results in aneurisms and death by rupture of such
abnormally formed arteries? Are the lungs not liable to receive such
deposits and form tubercles to such proportions as to become living
zoophytes capable of covering all of the mucous membrane of the lungs,
air passages and cells, and establish a perpetual dwelling of zoophytes
and absorb to themselves for their own maintenance and existence, blood
and nourishment of the whole body unto death? This being the result of
one chemical action of the body and all by and from nature, is it not
reasonable to suppose that the provision by nature is ready to produce
of itself the chemicals of kind, quality and quantity equal to the
destruction of this enemy of life?


A HOPE FOR THE AFFLICTED.

I think before all diseases pass the zenith, after which the decline is
beyond the vital rally, they are curable by the genius of nature's own
remedies, and believe the truths of this conclusion have been supported
abundantly by daily demonstrations. I believe there is hope for the
consumptive equal to one-half if not greater when taken in proper time,
which is at any period of the disease, previous to breaking down by
ulceration or otherwise, lung tissue, and even after this period, hope
is not altogether lost.


EVIDENCES OF TRUTH.

Nature and good sense are terms that mean much to persons who are used
to set aside all else for facts. A fact may and often does stay before
our eyes for all time powerful in truth, but we heed not its lessons.
Instances, at least a few, would not be amiss at this time. Electricity,
the most powerful force known, was never able with all its works to get
the attention of man's thoughts, more than to call it thunder and
lightning, and let it pass from his mind from time to time, till
brighter ages woke up a Franklin, Edison, Morse and others who heeded
its useful lessons enough to make application of its powers for its
force and speed. By the results obtained, they and others have used its
powers and gotten truths as rewards, that they did not know even existed
in or out of electricity or in any of the store-houses of all nature.
But as the winds of time have blown open a few leaves of nature's book,
and their brilliant pages and useful lessons have found a lodging place
in such persons as were endowed with wisdom to see, and patience to
persevere, by their energy and wisdom to-day we have many pages to add
to our books of useful knowledge. We can now talk around and all over
the earth by the power of the dreaded thunder and lightning. By it we
travel, by it we see at night, by it we search on land and sea for
friend or foe; in fact, it is dreaded no more but sought, used and loved
by all who know of its uses in civil life. Thus our enemy has become our
footstool. By the speed of man's ability we know and use the comforts
that nature holds in store for us until we call for and use them.

Other and just as useful questions as electricity await our attention.
Parts and uses of the human body, to-day are to us as little understood
as electricity was at any time. The lung to-day is an unknown mystery,
as to what its power and uses are; we only know that air goes in and out
of the lungs; farther than that we are at sea. We have just as little
knowledge of the heart as the lungs, we find a hollow fibrinous tank
receiving and discharging blood; we are not prepared to say whether the
corpuscle is formed in the heart or not; all else is conjectural and
speculative on the subject the corpuscle. We see channels leading to and
from it, to and from all parts of the body, muscles and glands. We know
it moves when we are alive, we know it is silent in death.


LOADED WITH IGNORANCE.

We pass from there to the liver loaded down with ignorance, from what we
know, cannot tell whether it is male or female, we simply know its size,
location and something of its form and action, but nothing beyond
conjecture. It stands to-day one of the wonders to him that tries to
reason.


LACK OF KNOWLEDGE OF THE KIDNEY.

We will leave this organ of many pounds with an open confession of our
ignorance and take up the kidney. At what time was the man and woman
born that knew and left on record a true and reliable knowledge of the
renal capsule. We do not know whether that is the organ that makes our
teeth, our hair or generates a powerful acid by which lime is kept in
solution, so as not to form stones and such deposits.


HOW A PURGATIVE ACTS.

Nature's method is simple and easily comprehended in delivering
purgative medicines, with their softening powers to dry constipated
fecal matter. For instance: We would give a purgative in the shape of
salts, rhubarb, calomel and other substances of choice. The first
question of the physician is how is this to pass through so densely
packed substance or fecal matter which is in the bowels? At this time we
will be short in the statement. The purgative poisons are taken up by
the the secretions conveyed to the lymphatics. To soften and wash out is
the object of nature. The lymphatics begin the work of washing out by
starting action of the excretories and furnishes the water to soften,
which is injected into the bowels from the mouth to the extremities by a
system of salivation.


FLUX (BLOODY DYSENTERY.)

Flux is common in all temperate climates. It generally shows its true
nature as dysentery after a few hours of tiresome feeling, aching in
head, back and bowels. At first nothing is felt or thought of more than
a few movements of the bowels than is common for each day. Some pain and
griping are felt with increase at each stool, until a chilly feeling is
felt all over the body, with violent pains in lower bowels, with
pressing desire to go to stool, and during and after passage of stool a
feeling that there is still something in the bowels that must pass. Soon
that down pressure partially subsides, and on examination of passage a
quantity of blood is seen which shows the case is bloody flux, as the
disease is called and known in the southern states of North America, or
bloody dysentery in the more northern states. It generally subsides by
the use of family remedies, such as sedatives, astringents, and
palliative diets. But the severity in other cases increases and the
discharges have more blood, greater pain, mixed with gelatinous
substance even to mucous membrane of bowels, high fever all over except
abdomen, which is quite cold to the hand. Back, head and limbs suffer
much with heat and pain, and much nausea is felt at all motions of
bowels. Bowels change from cold to hot, even to 104, at which time all
symptoms point to inflammation of the bowels. The colon in particular,
at which time discharge grows black, frothy and very offensive from
decomposition of blood. Soon collapse and death close out the case,
notwithstanding the very best skill has been employed to save the life
of the patient. The doctor has tried to stop pain by opiates and other
sedatives, tried to check bowels with astringents, used tonics and
stimulants, but all have failed, the patient is dead.


HOW DOES THE OSTEOPATH CURE?

But the question for the Osteopath is: At what point would you work to
suppress the sensation of the colon and permit veins to open and allow
blood to return to heart? Does irritation of a sensory nerve cause vein
to contract and refuse blood to complete circuit from and to the heart?
Does flux begin with the sensory nerves of bowels? If so, reduce
sensation at all points connecting with bowels, stop all overplus, keep
veins free and open from cutaneous to deep sensory ganglion of whole
spine and abdomen. Remember the fascia is what suffers and dies in all
cases of death by bowels and lungs. Thus the nerves of all the fascia of
bowels and abdomen must work or you may lose all cases of flux, for in
the fascia exists much of the soothing and vital qualities of nature.
Guard it well, so it can work to repair all losses or death will begin
in fascia and through pass it to the whole system.


FLUX MORE FULLY DESCRIBED.

"Bloody flux" is a flow of blood with other fluids from the mucous
membrane of the bowels. A disease generally of the summer and fall
seasons, and is more abundant south than north of latitude 40 deg. of
North America. It is so well known in this country by its ravages that to
describe it is almost useless, as bloody fluids pass from bowels in all
cases.

We reason that the veins have contracted by nerve irritation and fail to
convey blood to heart on normal time. By which delay decomposition does
its work. Thus a cause is seen for excreting fluids by motor action of
bowels, when supplied by the excretory system.


OSTEOPATHIC REMEDIES.

An Osteopath to successfully treat flux or bloody dysentery must reason
and address his attention first to the soreness and irritation of
bowels, which he finds suffering with oedema of mucous membrane of all
the glands and blood vessels belonging to the lower bowels. As quiet is
the first thing desired, he will direct his attention to the sensory
nerves of the colon and small intestines, in order to reduce the
resistance of the veins and diminish the arterial action. When he has
diminished sensation of the veins of the bowels, the arterial force
completes its circuit through the veins back to the heart, with much
less arterial action, because venous resistance has ceased and the
circuit is normal, and healthy action is the result.


MEDICAL REMEDIES.

The medicine man addresses his remedies first to the misery, with the
desire to relax the nerves and overcome pain, and obtains this result
through some class of opiates. After a short rest he addresses his
attention to the motor action of the heart, with the view of giving
arteries greater power to force arterial blood through all obstructions,
and tries to stop all excretory wastings by the use of astringents
combined with sedatives and soothing fluids.


MORE OF THE OSTEOPATHIC REMEDY.

The Osteopath will govern sensory and motor nerves by digital
suspension of the abnormal irritability of the sensory nerves on the
various parts of the spine as indicated by the disease.

He uses no injections for the bowels for the reason that the necessary
fluids naturally flow into the bowels to lubricate and quiet, and
proceed at once to repair all irritated surfaces, which is abundantly
supplied by nature from the mouth of the sphincter ani, without which
forethought and preparation, nature's God will prove his incompetency
for the great battle of life.

You administer medicines from the chemistry of the arts by mouth,
injection and otherwise. We adjust the machinery and depend upon
nature's chemical laboratory for all elements necessary to repair, give
ease and comfort, while nature's corpuscles do all the work necessary.




CHAPTER IX.

THE BLOOD.

     Uses for Fluids--Blood an Unknown Fluid--Harvey Only Reached the
     Banks of the River of Life--Blood Is Systematically
     Furnished--Fatality of Ignorance--To Find the Cause Must Be
     Honest--Following Arteries and Nerves--Feeding the Nerves--The
     Blood on Its Journey--Powers Necessary to Move Blood--Venous Blood
     Suspended.


USES FOR FLUIDS.

If a thousand kinds of fluids exist in our bodies a thousand uses
require their help, or they would not appear. Thus to know how and why
they help in the economy of life is the study of he who acts only when
he knows at what places each must appear, and fill the part and use for
which it is designed. If the demand for a substance is absolute its
chance to act and answer that call and obey such command must not be
hindered while in preparation, nor on its journey to local destination,
for by its power all action may depend. Thus blood, albumen, gall,
acids, alkalies, oils, brain fluid and other substances formed by
associations while in physiological processes of formation must be on
time in place and measured abundantly, that the biogenic laws of nature
can have full power with time to act, and material in abundance and of
kinds to suit. Thus all things else may be in place in ample quantities
and fail because the power is withheld and no action for want of brain
fluids with its power to vivify all animated nature which have followed
any fluid found in the body, and followed it from formation to use and
exhaustion step by step until he knows what form a union with one or
many kinds. Thus we can do no more than feed and trust the laws of life
as nature gives them to man. We must arrange our bodies in such true
lines that ample nature can select and associate by its definite
measures, weights and choices of kinds, that which can make all fluids
needed for our bodily uses, from the crude blood to the active flames of
life, as seen when marshalled for the duties of that stands and obey the
edicts of the mind of the infinite.


BLOOD AN UNKNOWN FLUID.

Blood is an unknown red or black fluid, found inside of the human body,
in tubes, channels or tunnels. What it is, how it is made, and what it
does after it leaves the heart in the arteries, before it returns to the
heart through the veins, is one of the mysteries of animal life. It has
been tried to be analyzed to know of what it is composed, and when done,
we know but little more of what it really is, than we know what sulphur
is made of. We know it is a colored fluid, and it is in all parts of the
flesh and bone. We know it builds up heaps of flesh, but how, is the
question that leads us to honor the unknowable law of life, by which it
does the work of its mysterious construction of all forms found in the
parts of man. In all our efforts to learn what it is, what it is made
of, and what enters it as life and gives it the building powers with
that intelligence it displays in building, that we see in daily
observation, is to us such an incomprehensible wonder, that with the
"sacred writers" we are constrained to say, Great is the mystery of
"Godliness." I dislike to say we know but very little about the blood,
"in fact, nothing at all," but such is the truth under oath. We cannot
make one drop of blood because of our ignorance of the laws of its
production. If we knew what its components were, we would soon build
large machinery, make and have blood for sale in quantities to suit the
purchaser. But alas! we cannot with all the combined intelligence of
man, make one drop of blood, because we do not know what it is. Then, as
its production is by the skill of a foreigner whose education has grown
to suit the work, we must silently sit by and willingly receive the work
when handed out for use by the producer. At this point I will say that
an intelligent Osteopath is willing to be governed by the immutable
laws of nature, and feel that he is justified to pass the fluid on from
place to place and trust results.


HARVEY ONLY REACHED THE BANKS OF THE RIVER OF LIFE.

When Harvey solved by his powers of reason a knowledge of the
circulation of the blood, he only reached the banks of the river of
life. He saw that the heads and mouths of the rivers of blood begin and
end in the heart, to do the mysterious works of constructing man. Then
he went into camp and left this compound for other minds to speculate
on, of the how it was made, of what composed, and how it became a medium
of life which sustains all beings. He saw the genius of nature had
written its wisdom and will of life, by the red ink of all truth.


BLOOD IS SYSTEMATICALLY FURNISHED.

Blood is systematically furnished from the heart to all divisions of our
bodies. When we go any course from the heart we will find one or more
arteries leaving heart. If we go toward the head, we find caroted,
cervical and vertebral arteries in pairs, large enough to supply blood
abundantly for bone, brain, and muscle. That blood builds all the brain,
all the bone, nerves, muscles, glands, membranes, fascia and skin. Then
we see wisdom just as much in the venous system, as in the arterial.
Thus the arteries supply all demands, and the veins carry away all
waste material, with returning blood of veins. We find building and
healthy renovation are united in a perpetual effort to construct and
sustain purity. In these two are the facts and truths of life and
health. If we go to any other part or organ of the body, we find just
the same law of supply, arteries first, then renovation, beginning with
the veins. The rule of artery and vein is universal in all living
beings, and the Osteopath must know that, and abide by its rulings, or
he will not succeed as a healer. Place him in open combat with fevers of
winter or summer and he saves, or loses, his patients, just in
proportion to his ability to sustain the artery to feed, and the veins
to purify by taking away the dead substances before they ferment, in the
lymphatics and cellular system. He shows just the same stupidity and
ignorance of support from arteries and purity by the veins when he fails
to cure erysipelas, flux, pneumonia, croup, scarlet fever, diphtheria,
measles, mumps, rheumatism, and on to all diseases of climate and
seasons.


FATALITY OF IGNORANCE.

It is ignorance and inattention to the arteries to supply and the veins
to carry away all deposits before they form tumors in lungs, abdomen or
any part of the system. Thus man's ignorance of how and why the blood
renovates and why tumors are formed, has allowed the knife to be found
in the belts of so many doctors to-day. On this law Osteopathy has
successfully stood and cured more than any school of cures, and has
sustained all its diplomates financially and otherwise. I write this
article on blood for the student of Osteopathy. I want him to put nature
to a test of its merit, and know if it is a law equal to all demands. If
not, he is very much and seriously limited when he goes into war with
diseases. What is to be understood by "Disease?"[5]

[Footnote 5: DISEASE. 1. "Lack of ease. 2. An alteration in the state of
the body, or some of its organs, interrupting or disturbing the
performance of the vital functions and causing or threatening pain and
weakness; malady; affection; illness; sickness; disease;
disorder."--Webster's International Dictionary.]

When we use the word "disease," we mean anything that makes an unnatural
showing in the body by pain, overgrowth of muscle; gland; organ;
physical pain; numbness; heat; cold; or anything that we find not
necessary to life and comfort. I have no wish to rob surgery of its
useful claims, and its scientific merits to suffering man and beast.
Such is not my object, but to place the Osteopath's eye of reason on the
hunt of the great whys that the knife is useful at all, I am sure it
comes often to remove growths and diseased flesh and bone that have
gotten so by man's ignorance of a few great truths. 1st, If blood is
allowed to be taken to a gland or organ, and not taken away in due time
the accumulation will become bulky enough to stop the excretory nerves
and cause local paralysis; then the nutrient nerves proceed to construct
tumors, and on and on until there is no relief but the knife or death.
Had this blood not been conveyed there, it would not be there at all,
either in bulk or less quantities. Had it simply done its work and
passed on we could have no material to grow such abnormal beings. If a
tumefaction appears in one side, and not in the other, why so? and why
is there no growth in one side the same as the other? It takes no great
effort of mind to see that the veins did not receive and carry off the
blood, and a growth was natural, as the condition could not do otherwise
and be true to nature. Thus man's ignorance has made a condition for the
knife. Had he taken the hint and let the blood pass on when its work was
done, he would not have to witness the guillotine of death to his
patients, whose early pains told him a renal vein or some vessel below
the diaphragm was ligated by an impacted colon, or a few ribs pulling
and bringing diaphragm down across vena cava and thoracic duct and
causing excitement or paralysis of solar plexus, or any other nerves
that pass through diaphragm with blood to and from heart and lungs.


TO FIND THE CAUSE.

How to find causes of diseases or where a hindrance is located that
stops blood is a great mental worry to the Osteopath when he is called
to treat a patient. The patient tells him "where he hurts," how much "he
hurts," how long "he has hurt," how hot or cold he is. The doctor puts
this symptom and that symptom in a column, adds them up according to the
latest books on symptomatology, finally he is able to guess at some name
to call the disease. Then he proceeds and treats as his pap's father
heard his granny say their old family doctor treated "them sort of
diseases in North Carolina." An Osteopath feels bad to have to hunt
cause for diseases, and not know how to start out to find the mechanical
cause. He feels that the people expect more than guessing of an
Osteopath. He feels that he must put his hand on the cause and prove
what he says by what he does, that he will not get off by the feeble
minded trash of stale habits that go with doctors of medicine, and by
his knowledge he must show his ability to go beyond the musty bread of
symptomatology and water his patients made, from the cider of the ripe
apples from the tree of knowledge.


MUST BE HONEST.

An Osteopath should be a clear-headed, conscientious, truth loving man,
and never speak until he knows he has found and can demonstrate the
truth he claims to know.


FOLLOWING ARTERIES AND NERVES.

I understand anatomy and physiology after fifty years casual and close
attention, the last twenty years being very continued and close
attention to what has been said, by all the best writers whom I have
perused, many of whom are considered standard guides for the student and
practitioner to be governed by. I have dissected and witnessed the very
best anatomists that the world affords dissect. I have followed the
knife after arteries through the whole distribution of blood of arterial
systems, to the great and small vessels, until the lenses of the most
powerful microscopes seemed to exhaust their ability to perceive the
termination of the artery; with the same care following the knife and
microscope from nerve center to terminals of the large to the infinitely
small fibers around which those fine nerve vines entwine. First like a
bean entwining by way of the right around and up continuing to the
right, and then turn my microscope to the entwining of another set of
nerves which is to the left universally as the hop. Those nerves are
solid, cylindrical and stratified in form, with many leading from the
lymphatics to the artery, and to the red and white muscles, fascia,
cellular-membrane, striated and unstriated organs, all connecting to and
traveling with the artery, and continuing with it through its whole
circuit from start to terminals.


FEEDING THE NERVES.

Like a thirsty herd of camels, the whole nerve system, sensory, motor,
nutrient, voluntary and involuntary; this herd of sappers or hungry
nerves seems to be in sufficient quantities and numbers to consume all
blood and cause the philosopher to ask the question: "Is not the labor
of the artery complete when it has fed the hungry nerves?" Is he not
justified in the conclusion that the nerves do gestate and send forth
all substances that are applied by nature in the construction of man? If
this philosophy be true, then he who arms himself for the battles of
Osteopathy when combating diseases, has a guide and a light whereby he
can land safely in port from every voyage.


THE BLOOD ON ITS JOURNEY.

Turn the eye of reason to the heart and observe the blood start on its
journey. It leaves in great haste and never stops even in the smaller
arteries. It is all in motion and very quick and powerful at all
places. Its motion indicates no evidence of construction even supposable
during such time, but we can find in the lymphatics, cells or pockets,
motion slow enough to suppose that in such cells, living beings can be
formed and carried to their places by the lymphatics for the purposes
they must fill, as bone, or muscle. Let us reason that blood has a great
and universal duty to perform, if it constructs, nourishes, and keeps
the whole nerve system normal in form and function.


POWERS NECESSARY TO MOVE BLOOD.

As blood and other fluids of life are ponderable bodies of different
consistences, and are moved through the system to construct, purify,
vitalize and furnish power necessary to keep the machinery in action, we
must reason on the different powers necessary to move those bodies
through arteries, veins, ducts, over nerves, spongy membranes, fascia,
muscles, ligaments, glands and skin; and judge from their unequal
density, and adjust force to meet the demand according to kinds, to be
sent to and from all parts.


VENOUS BLOOD SUSPENDED.

Suppose venous blood to be suspended by cold or other causes in the
lungs to the amount of oedema of the fascia, another mental look would
see the nerves of the fascia of the lungs in a high state of
excitement, cramping fascia on veins which is bound to stop flow of
blood to heart. No blood can pass through a vein that is closed by
resistance, nor can it ever do it until resistance is suspended. Thus
the cause of nerve irritation must be found and removed before the
channels can relax and open sufficiently to admit the passage of the
fluids being obstructed. And in order to remove this obstructing cause,
we must go to the nerve supply of the lungs, or any other part of the
body, and direct our attention to the cause of the nerve excitement, and
that only; and prosecute the investigation to a finish. If the breathing
be too fast and hurried, address your attention to the motor nerves,
then to the sensory, for through them you regulate and reduce the
excitement of the motor nerves of the arteries. As soon as sensation is
reduced the motor and sensory circuit is completed and the labor of the
artery is less, because of venous resistance having been removed. The
circuit of electricity is complete as proven by the completed arterial
and venous circuit for the reduction of motor irritation. The high
temperature disappears because distress gives place to the normal, and
recovery is the result.




CHAPTER X.

THE FASCIA.

     Where Is Disease Sown?--An Illustration of Conception--The Greatest
     Problem--A Fountain of Supply--Fascia Omnipresent--Connection with
     Spinal Cord--Goes With and Covers All Muscles--Proofs in
     Contagion--Study of Nerves and Fascia--Tumefy--Tumefaction.


WHERE DISEASE IS SOWN.

Disease is evidently sown as atoms of gas fluids, or solids. A suitable
place is necessary first to deposit the active principle of life, be
that what it may. Then a responsive kind of nourishment must be obtained
by the being to be developed. Thus we must find in animals that part of
the body that can assist by action and by qualified food to develop the
being in foetal life. Reason calls the mind to the rule of man's
gestative life first, and as a basis of thought, we look at the
quickening atom, the coming being, when only by the aid of a powerful
microscope can we see the vital germ. It looks like an atom of white
fibrin or detached particle of fascia. It leaves one parent as an atom
of fascia, and to live and grow, must dwell among friendly surroundings,
and be fed by such food as contains albumen, fibrin and lymph; also the
nerve generating power and qualities, as it then and there begins to
construct a suitable form in which to live and flourish. And as the
fascia is the best suited with nerves, blood, and white corpuscles, it
is but reasonable to look for the part that is composed of the greatest
per cent of fascia, and expect it, the germ, to dwell there for support
and growth.


AN ILLUSTRATION OF CONCEPTION.

When you follow the germ from father until it has left his system of
fascia, we find it flourishing in the womb, which organ is almost a
complete being of itself. The center, origin, and mother of all fascias.
It there dwells and grows to birth, and appears as a completed being, a
product of the life giving powers of the fascia.

With this foundation established we think we prove conception, growth,
and cause of all diseases to be in the fascia.

As this philosophy has chosen the fascia as a foundation on which to
stand, we hope the reader will chain his patience for a few minutes on
the subject of the fascia, and its relation to vitality. It stands
before the philosopher as one of, if not the deepest living problems
ever brought before the mind of man.

We will ask your attention in the attached effort to describe the fascia
at greater length: It being that principle that sheathes, permeates,
divides and sub-divides every portion of all animal bodies; surrounding
and penetrating every muscle and all its fibers--every artery, and every
fiber and principle thereunto belonging, and grows more wonderful as
your eye is turned upon the venous system with its great company of
lymphatics, which supplies the water of life, used to reduce too heavily
thickened blood of the veins, as it approaches the heart on its journey,
to be renewed after purification and thrown back into the arteries to
patrol, nourish and supply from headquarters to the videts of this great
moving army of life, the substance of which we are now speaking.


THE GREATEST PROBLEM.

The fascia is universal in man and equal in self to all other parts, and
stands before the world to-day the greatest problem, the most pleasing
thought. It carries to the mind of the philosopher the evidence,
absolute, that it is the "material man," and the dwelling place his of
spiritual being. It is the house of God, the dwelling place of the
Infinite so far as man is concerned. It is the fort which the enemy of
life takes by conquest through disease and winds up the combat and
places thereon the black flag of "no quarters." That enemy is sure to
capture all forts known as human beings at some time, although the
engagement may last for many years. Procrastination of surrender can
only be obtained by giving timely support to the supply of nourishment,
with an unobstructed condition, kept up in favor of the nerves
interested in the renewal of the human system, that powerful life force
that is bequeathed to man and all other beings, and acts through the
fascia of man and beast.


A FOUNTAIN OF SUPPLY.

The fascia gives one of, if not the greatest problems to solve as to the
part it takes in life and death. It belts each muscle, vein, nerve, and
all organs of the body. It is almost a network of nerves, cells and
tubes, running to and from it; it is crossed and filled with, no doubt,
millions of nerve centers and fibers to carry on the work of secreting
and excreting fluid vital and destructive. By its action we live, and by
its failure we shrink, or swell, and die. Each muscle plays its part in
active life. Each fiber of all muscles owes its pliability to that
yielding septum-washer, that gives all muscles help to glide over and
around all adjacent muscles and ligaments, without friction or jar. It
not only lubricates the fibers but gives nourishment to all parts of
the body. Its nerves are so abundant that no atom of flesh fails to get
nerve and fluid supply therefrom.


FASCIA OMNIPRESENT.

This life is surely too short to solve the uses of the fascia in animal
forms. It penetrates even its own finest fibers to supply and assist its
gliding elasticity. Just a thought of the completeness and universality
in all parts, even though you turn the visions of your mind to follow
the infinitely fine nerves. There you see the fascia, and in your wonder
and surprise, you exclaim, "Omnipresent in man and all other living
beings of the land and sea."

Other great questions come to haunt the mind with joy and admiration,
and we can see all the beauties of life on exhibition by that great
power with which the fascia is endowed. The soul of man with all the
streams of pure living water seems to dwell in the fascia of his body.

Does it not throw hot shot and shells of thought into man's famishing
chamber of reason; to feel that he has seen by thought the frame work of
life the dwelling place on which life sojourns? He feels that he can
find all disturbing causes of life, the place that diseases germinate
and grow, the seeds of disease and death.


CONNECTION WITH THE SPINAL CORD.

As life finds its general nutrient law in the fascia and its nerves, we
must connect them to the great source of supply by a cord running the
length of the spine, by which all nerves are supplied by the brain. The
cord throws out and supplies millions of nerves by which all organs and
parts are supplied with the elements of motion, all go to and terminate
in that great system, the fascia.

As we dip our cups deeper and deeper into the ocean of thought we feel
that the solution of life and health is close to the field of the
telescope of our mental search lights, and soon we will find the road to
health so plainly written that the wayfaring man cannot err though he be
a fool.


GOES WITH AND COVERS ALL MUSCLES.

As the student of anatomy explores the subject under his knife and
microscope he easily finds this membrane goes with and covers all
muscles, tendons and fibers, and separates them even to the least fiber.
All organs have a covering of this substance, though they may have names
to suit the organs, surfaces or parts spoken of.

We write much of the universality of the fascia to impress the reader
with the idea that this connecting substance must be free at all parts
to receive and discharge all fluids, if healthy to appropriate and use
in sustaining animal life, and eject all impurities that health may not
be impaired by the dead and poisoning fluids. Thus a knowledge of the
universal extent of the fascia is almost imperative, and is one of the
greatest aids to the person who seeks cause of disease. He of all men
should know more of the fascia, and when disease is local or general.
That the fascia and its nerves demand his attention first, and on his
knowledge of the same, much of his success, and the life of his patients
do depend.

Will the student of Osteopathy stop just a moment and see his medical
cotemporary plow the skin with the needle of his hypodermic syringe. He
drives it into and unloads his morphine and other poisonous drugs under
the skin, and into the very center of the nerves of the superficial
fascia. He produces paralysis of all nerves by this method, just as
certainly as if he had put his poison in the cerebellum, but not so
certain to produce instantaneous death as to unload in the brain. But if
he is faithfully ignorant, he will kill just as certainly at one place
as the other, because the poisonous effects can be easily taken to every
fiber of the whole body by the nerves and fibers of the fascia.

When you deal with the fascia you deal and do business with the branch
offices of the brain, and under the general corporation law, the same as
the brain itself, and why not treat it with the same degree of respect?

The doctor of medicine does effectual work through the medium of the
fascia. Why not you relax, contract, stimulate and clean the whole
system of all diseases by that willing and sufficient power to renovate
all parts of the system, from deadly compounds that generate through
delay and stagnation of fluids while in the fascia.

Our school is young, but the laws that govern life are as old as the
hours of all ages. We may find much that has never been written nor
practiced before, but all such discoveries are truths born with the
birth of eternity, old as God and as true as life.

The difference between a philosopher and a less powerful thinker is one
observes alone, and depends on his own powers of mind to arrive at
truth. Another lacks self confidence and mental energy.


PROOFS IN CONTAGION.

If disease is so highly attenuated, so etherial, and penetrable in
quality, and multiple in atoms; and a breath of air two quarts or more
taken into the lungs fully charged with contagion, how many thousand air
cells could be impregnated by one single breath? Say we take a case of
measles into a schoolroom of sixty pupils, in a warm and poorly
oxygenized atmosphere all day, would not the living gas thrown off from
active measles enter and irritate the air cells and close the most
irritable cells with the poisonous gas retained for active development
in those womb-like departments in the lungs.

Now you have the seeds in thousands of cells, which are as vital and
well supplied by nerves and blood as the womb itself. Would not reason
see the development of millions more of the vital beings who get their
nourishment from the vitality found in the human fascia, which comes
nearer to the surface in the lungs than in any part of the system,
except it be the womb.

In proof of the certainty of measles being taken up by the lungs at one
breath and caught by the secretions and conveyed to the universal system
of fascia to develop the contagion, I will give the case of one of my
boys who was sick with cold as I supposed; watering of eyes, cough,
fever and headache. He was in the country about eight miles from home,
and on our return stopped to get his books at a small school house. He
ran in, picked up his books that were lying upon the desk, walked the
length of the room which was about forty feet, was not there over
one-half minute and in just nine days forty-two children broke out with
measles. So certain is contagion to be taken up by the nerves and
vitalizing fluids of the fascia.

It seems that all the fascia needs to develop anything is to have the
seed planted in its arms for construction, the work will be done,
labeled, and handed out for inspection by the inspectors of all works.


STUDY OF NERVES AND FASCIA.

We must remember as we reason on the power of life which is located in
the fascia, that it occupies the whole body, and should we find a local
region that is disordered and wish to, we can relieve that part through
that local plexus of nerves which controls that organ and division. Thus
your attention should be directed to all nerves of that part. Sensory,
to modify sensation, blood must not be let run to the part by wild
motion, its flow must be gentle to suit the demands of nutrition,
otherwise weakness takes the place of strength, then we lose the
benefits of the nerves of nutrition, by which strength of all systems of
force are kept in action during life.

Suppose the nerves that supply the lungs with motion should stop, the
lungs would stop also; suppose they should half stop, the lungs would
surely half stop. Now we must reason, if we succeed in relieving lungs,
that all kinds of nerves are found in them. The lungs move, thus you
find motor; they have feeling, thus the sensory; they grow by nutrition,
(thus the nutrient nerves;) they move by will, or without it; they have
a voluntary and involuntary system; they move in sleep by the
involuntary system.

The blood supply comes under the motor system of nerves, and delivers at
proper places for the convenience of the nerves of nutrition. The
sensory nerves limit the supply of arterial blood to the quantity
necessary, as the construction is going on by each successive stroke of
the heart. They limit the action of the lungs, receive and expel air in
quantities sufficient to keep up purity of the blood, etc. With this
foundation we observe if too great action of the motor nerves, shows by
breathing too often to be normal, we are admonished to reduce breathing
by addressing attention to the sensory nerves of lungs, in order that
the blood may pass through the veins, whose irritability has refused to
receive the blood, farther than arterial terminals. So soon as sensation
is reduced relaxation of nerve fibers of veins tolerates the passage of
venous blood, which is deposited in the spongy portions of the lungs in
such quantities as to overcome the activity of the nerves of renovation
that accompanies the fascia in its process of ejection of all fluids
that have been detained an abnormal time, first in the region of the
fascia, then in the arterial and venous circulation. Thus you see what
must be done. The veins as channels must carry away all blood as soon as
it has deposited its nutrient supplies to the places for which it is
constructed, otherwise, by delay vitality by asphyxia is lost to the
blood which calls a greater force of the arterial pumps to drive the
blood through the parts, ruptures its capillaries and deposits the blood
in the mucous membrane; until nerves of the fascia becomes powerless by
surrounding pressure, which causes through the sensory nerves an
irritability at the heart, which puts in force all its powers of motion.


TUMEFY, TUMEFACTION.

Webster's definition of tumefaction is to swell by any fluids or solids
being detained abnormally at any place in the body.

The location may be in, or on any part of the system. No part is exempt;
even the brain, heart, lungs, liver, stomach and bowels, bladder,
kidneys, uterus, lymphatics, glands, nerves, veins, arteries, skin and
all membranes are subject to swellings locally or generally, and with
equal certainty they perish and shrink away. If either condition should
exist death to the parts or all of the body will occur from want of
nutrition. Instance, in lung fever which begins when swelling is
established in lymphatics of lungs, trachea, nostrils, throat and face.
At once you see the pressure on the nerve fibers compressed to such
degree that they cannot operate excretories of lungs or any part of the
pulmonary, system. Veins, suspended by irritation of the nerves,
arteries are excited to fever heat in action with increase of
tumefaction. A tumefying condition undoubtedly marks the beginning of
all catarrhal diseases. Its ravages extend to the diseases of the fall
and winter seasons. They are so marked on examination that the most
skeptical cannot dispute or doubt the truth of this position. In fact he
is already committed to a belief that there is something in the fluids
that he must purify by the chemical process of drugs.


MEDICAL DOCTOR'S TREATMENT.

He looks on, and treats winter diseases with powerful purgatives,
sweats, blisters, hot and cold applications with a view to remove
congesting fluids. He is not very certain which team of medical power he
can depend on. He hitches up many kinds of drugs hoping that a few of
them may be able to carry the burden. He bridles his horses with opium,
loads them down with purgative powders, and whips them through with
castor oil, and for fear they will not travel fast enough he uses as a
spur a delicately formed instrument known as the hypodermic syringe. He
punches and prods until his horses fall exhausted. Disease and death
should give him a large pension for the assistance he has rendered in
their service. All is guess work whose father and mother are "Tradition
and Ignorance." Ignorance of the kind that is wholly inexcusable to
anyone but a medical doctor. An Osteopath who does not understand the
general law of tumefaction of the whole system is not excusable from the
fact that tumefaction, disease and death are so plainly written on the
face of all diseases that the blind need not have eyes to see, nor the
philosopher any brain to enable him to know this foundation is the
highest known truth of all man's intellectual possessions. Thus by the
law of tumefaction, death can and does succumb to its indomitable will.
Observations without record will show any fair minded person that
tumefaction does cause death in the majority of cases. But another power
is equally as effective in destruction of life which is just the reverse
of tumefaction. It destroys by withholding nutrition and all of the
fluids; the effect is starvation, shrinkage and death. Thus you see it
is equally certain in results. In the one case death ensues from an
overplus of unappropriated fluids of nutrition, in the other there is no
appropriation to sustain animal life and the patient dies from
starvation. The same law holds good in the parts as well as in the whole
body.




CHAPTER XI.

FEVERS.

     Be Armed With Facts--Union of Human Gases With Oxygen--Fever and
     Nettle-rash. Nature Constructs for a Wise Purpose--Processes of
     Life Must be Kept in Motion--No Satisfaction from Authors--Animal
     Heat--Semeiology--Symptomatology--Definition of Fever--Fevers only
     Effects--Result of Stoppages of Vein or Artery--Aneurisms.


BE ARMED WITH FACTS.

When we reason for causes we must begin with facts, and hold them
constantly in line for action, and use, all the time. It would be good
advice never to enter a contest without your saber is of the purest
steel of reason. By such only can you cut your way to the magazine of
truth.

As we line up to learn something of the cause of fever, we are met by
heat, a living fact. Does that put the machinery of your mind in motion?
If not, what will arouse your mental energy? You see that heat is not
like cold. It is not a horse with eyes, head, neck, body, limbs and
tail; but it is as much of a being as the horse; it is a being of heat.
If cause made the horse, and cause made the heat, why not devote all
energy in seeking for cause in all disturbances of life?


UNION OF HUMAN GASES WITH OXYGEN.

Who says heat is not a union of the human gases with oxygen and other
substances as they pass out of the excretory system. By what force do
parts of the engine of life move? If by the motor power of electricity,
how fast must the heart or life current run to ignite the gasolene of
the body and set a person on fire and burn to fever heat?

If we know anything of the laws of electricity, we must know velocity
modulates its temperature. Thus heat and cold are the effect.

If we understand anatomy as we should, we know man is the greatest
engine ever produced, complete in form, an electro-magnet, a motor, and
would be incomplete if it could not burn its own gases.

When man, is said to have fever, he is only on "fire," to burn out the
deadly gases, which a perverted, dirty, abnormal, laboratory, has
allowed to accumulate by friction of the journals of his body, or in the
supply of vital fluids. We are only complete when normal in all
parts,--a true compass points to the normal only.

When reasoning on the fever subject would it not be strictly in line to
suppose that the lowest perceptible grade of fever requires a less
additional physical energy to remove some foreign body from the person,
that at first would naturally show a very light effect upon the human
system, which would be the effect of itchy sensation.


FEVER AND NETTLE-RASH.

Let us stop and reason. Might this effect (itching) not come from
obstructed gases that flow through and from the skin? If gas should be
detained in the system by the excretory ducts the substance closing the
porous system would cause irritation of nerves, and increase the heart's
action to such degree that the temperature is raised to fever heat, by
the velocity with which electricity is brought into action. Electricity
being the force that is naturally required to contract muscles and force
gases from the body.

Let us advance higher in the scale of foreign bodies until we arrive to
the condition of steam, which is more dense than gas. Would it not take
more force to discharge it? By the same rule of reasoning we find water
to be much thicker as an element than either gas or steam.

Then we have lymph as another element, albumen, fibrin, with all the
elements found in arterial and venous blood, all of which forces
required to circulate, pass through and out of the system, must be
increased to suit. Therefore we are brought to this conclusion, that the
different degrees of temperature do mark the density of the fluids with
which the motor engine has to contend.

If gas produces an itching sensation, would it not be reasonable to
suppose that the consistence of lymph would cause elevations on the
skin, such as nettle-rash.

If this method of reasoning sustains us thus far, why not argue that
albumen obstructed while in the system of the fascia would require a
much greater force to put it through the skin. The excretions of the
body would cause a much greater heat to even throw the albumen as far as
the cuticle.

If a greater, with a greater velocity, why not grant to this as cause of
the disturbance of motor energy equal to measles. Let us add to this
albumen a quantity of fibrin, have we not cause to expect the energy
hereby required to be equal to that nerve and blood energy found in
smallpox?

If this be true, have we not a foundation in truth on which to base our
conclusions? That the difference in forces manifested is the resistance
offered by the difference in the consistence of devitalized fluids which
the nerves and fibers of the fascia labor to excrete.


NATURE CONSTRUCTS TO SUIT A WISE PURPOSE.

By close observation the philosopher who is hunting to acquaint himself
with the laws of cause and effect, finds upon his voyages as an
explorer, that nature as cause does construct for wise purposes; and
shows as much wisdom in the construction and preparation of all bodies,
beings and worlds, as the workings of those beings show when in action.

As life, the highest known principle sent forth by nature to vivify,
construct and govern all beings, it is expected to be the indweller and
operator, and one of the greatest perceivable and universal laws of
nature. And when it becomes necessary to break the friendly relation
between life and matter, nature closes up the channels of supply.

It may begin its work near the heart, at the origin of the greatest
blood vessels, or do its work at any point. It may begin its closing
process at the extremities of the veins or anywhere where exhausted
vital fluids may enter for return to the heart for renewal by union with
new material.

As nature is never satisfied with incompleteness in anything, all
interferences from whatsoever cause are sufficient for nature to call a
halt and begin the work of excavation by bringing the necessary fluids,
already prepared in the chemical laboratory, to dissolve and wash away
all obstructing deposits previous to beginning the work of
reconstruction, which is to repair all injured parts of the machinery
if disabled by atmospheric cause, poisons, or otherwise.

When nature renovates it is never satisfied to leave any obstruction in
any part of the body. All the powers of its battery force are brought in
line to do duty, and never stop short of completeness which ends in
perfection.

All seasons of the year come and go, and we see year in and out the
perpetual processes of construction of one class of bodies, and the
passing away of others.

Vegetation builds forests, and cold builds mountains of ice to be
dissolved and sent into the ocean to purify the water, and keep the
brines from drying to powder, as salt.


PROCESSES OF LIFE MUST BE KEPT IN MOTION.

All the processes of earth-life, must be kept in perpetual motion to
cultivate and be kept in healthy condition, or the world would wither
and die, and go to the tombs of space, to join the funeral procession of
other dead worlds. Thus you see all nature comes and goes by the fiat of
wisely adjusted laws.


NO SATISFACTION FROM AUTHORS.

Read all the authors from AEsculapius to this date, and all combined
leave the inquirers without a single fact as to the cause or causes of
fever.

One says fever may come from too much carbon. Another says chemical
defects may be the cause.

I would like to agree with some of the good men of our date or the
ancient theorists if I could, but they, both dead and alive, are a blank
except the tons of paper they have covered all over with conjectures,
and closed out by the words "Perhaps so's and howevers" spoken in all
tongues and languages on earth.

All have explored for centuries for the cause of fevers, and on return
from their multiple voyages say, we hope some day to find the cause. We
have killed many dogs experimenting, but have failed to find the cause
of fever.


ANIMAL HEAT.

To think of fever, we think of animal heat. By habit we want to know how
great the heat is. We measure by a yard stick till we find we have 100
deg., 102 deg., 104 deg., to 106 deg., at this point we stop as we find
too many yards of red calico to suit the size of the purse of life. Which
we think cannot consume more than 106 yards of heat. We begin to ask for
the substances that are more powerful than fire. We try all known fire
compounds and fail. The fire department had done faithful work, and all
it could bring to bear on the fire. It had put on hose and steam, knocked
shingles off and windows out, but not until the fire had ruined the house
with all its inside and outside usefulness and beauties. Another and
another house gets on fire and burns just as the first did. All are
content to see the ruins and say it is the will of the Lord; never
thinking for a moment that it was with the aid of the heart that the
brain burned up the body.

Of what use is a knowledge of anatomy to man if he overlooks cause and
effect in the results obtained by the machinery that anatomy should
teach? He finds each part connected to all others with the wisdom that
has given a set of plans and specifications that are without a flaw or
omission. The body generates its own heat and modulates to suit climate
and season. It can generate through its electro-motor system far beyond
the kindly normal, to the highest known fever heat, and is capable of
modulations far above or below normal. A knowledge of Osteopathy will
prepare you to bring the system under the rulings of the physical laws
of life. Fever is electric heat only.


SEMEIOLOGY.

(Med.) The science of the signs or symptoms of disease.


SYMPTOMATOLOGY.

The doctrine of symptoms; that part of the science of medicine which
treats of the symptoms of disease. Semeiology.

These definitions are from Webster's International Dictionary,
considered by all English speaking people as a standard authority. Both
words are chosen names to represent that system of guess work, which is
now and has been used as a method of ascertaining what disease is or
might be. It is supposed to be the best method known to date to classify
or name diseases, after which guessing begins in earnest. What kinds of
poisons, how much and how often to use them, and guess how much good or
how much harm is being done to the sick person.

To illustrate more forcibly, to the mind of the reader that such system
though honored by age is only worthy the name of guess work, as shown by
the following standard authority on fevers:


POTTER'S DEFINITION OF FEVER.

"Fever is a condition in which there are present the phenomena of rise
of temperature, quickened circulation, marked tissue change, and
disordered secretions.

"The primary cause of the fever phenomena is still a mooted (discussed
and debated) question, and is either a disorder of the sympathetic
nervous system giving rise to disturbances of the vaso-motor filaments,
or a derangement of the nerve centers located adjacent to the corpus
striatum, which have been found, by experiment, to govern the processes
of heat production, distribution, and dissipation.

"Rise of temperature is the pre-eminent feature of all fevers, and can
only be positively determined by the use of the clinical thermometer.
The term feverishness is used when the temperature ranges from 99 deg. to
100 deg. fahr.; slight fever if 100 deg. or 101 deg.; moderate, 102 deg.
or 103 deg.; high if 104 deg. or 105 deg. and intense if it exceed the
latter. The term hyperpyrexia is used when the temperature shows a
tendency to remain at 106 deg. fahr. and above.

"Quickened circulation is the rule in fevers, the frequency usually
maintaining a fair ratio with the increase of the temperature. A rise of
one degree fahr. is usually attended with an increase of eight to ten
beats of the pulse per minute.

"The following table gives a fair comparison between temperature and
pulse:--

   TABLE OF DEGREES.

   A temperature of 98 deg. corresponds to a pulse of 60 deg.
          "         99 deg.       "      "      "     70 deg.
          "        100 deg.F      "      "      "     80 deg.
          "        101 deg.F      "      "      "     90 deg.
          "        102 deg.F      "      "      "    100 deg.
          "        103 deg.F      "      "      "    110 deg.
          "        104 deg.F      "      "      "    120 deg.
          "        105 deg.F      "      "      "    130 deg.
          "        106 deg.F      "      "      "    140 deg.

"The tissue waste is marked in proportion to the severity and duration
of the febrile phenomena, being slight or (nil) in febricula, and
excessive in typhoid fever.

"The disordered secretions are manifested by the deficiency in the
salivary, gastric, intestinal, and nephritic secretions, the tongue
being furred, the mouth clammy, and there occurring anorexia, thirst,
constipation, and scanty, high-colored acid urine."[6]

[Footnote 6: What has the student gained by reading the above definition
of this standard author and representative of present medical attainment
but a labored effort to explain what he does not know.]


FEVERS ONLY EFFECTS.

Fevers are effects only. The cause may be far from mental conclusions.
If we have a house with one bell, and ten wires each fastened to a door
running to the center, all having wire connection and so arranged that
to pull any one wire will set the bell in motion, and without an
indicator you cannot tell which wire is disturbed, producing the effect
or ringing of the bell at the center. An electrician would know at once
the cause, but to discriminate and locate the wire disturbed is the
study.

Before a bell can be heard from any door, the general battery must be
charged. Thus you see but one source of supply. To better illustrate--we
will take a house with eight rooms, and all supplied by one battery--one
is a reception room, one a parlor, one a sitting room, one bed room,
one cloak room, one dining room, one a kitchen, and one a basement room,
all having wires and bells running to one bell in the clerk's office,
which has an indicator for each room by numbers on its face. If the
machinery is in good order he can call and answer correctly all the time
and never make a mistake. But should he ring to call the cook and her
bell keep on ringing and she and clerk could not stop it, and they
summon an electrician, what would you think if he began at the parlor
bell to adjust a trouble of the kitchen bell? Surely you would not have
him treat the parlor bell first, because you know the cook could only
answer by the effect, or rattling of the office bell. Hers is cause,
sound at office, effect. Now to apply this illustration, we will say a
system of bells and connecting wires run to all parts or rooms of the
body, from the battery of power or the brain, conveyed by the strings of
wires or nerves, that are put up and run to all active or vital parts of
the body. Thus arranged we see how blood is driven to any part of the
system, by the power that is sent over the nerves from the brain to the
spinal cord, and from there to all nerves of each and all divisions of
the body. Then your blood that has done its work in constructing parts
or all of the system, entering veins to be returned to the heart for
renewal. Each vein, great and small, has nerves with them as servants
of power, to force blood back to heart through the different sets of
tubes known as veins, and made to suit the duties they have to perform
in the process of life. As it travels to the heart with blood too thick
to suit the lungs, the great system of lymphatics pour in water to suit
demands, preparatory to entering the lungs to be purified and renewed.
Thus you see nature has amply prepared all the machinery and power to
prepare material and construct all parts, and when in normal condition
the mind and wisdom of God is satisfied that the machine will go on and
build and run according to the plan and specification. If this be true
as nature proves at every point and principle, what can man do farther
than plumb, line up, and trust to nature to get results desired, "life
and health?" Can we add or suggest any improvement? If not, what is left
for us to do is to keep bells, batteries and wires in normal place and
trust to normal law as given by nature.


RESULT OF STOPPAGE OF VEIN OR ARTERY.

But few questions remain to be asked by the philosophical navigator when
he sets sail to go to the cause of flux. Would he go to blood supply?
Certainly, there must be supply previous to deposit. Reason would cause
us to combine the fact that blood must be in perpetual motion from and
to the heart during life, and that law is the fiat of all nature which
is indispensable and absolute. Blood must not stop its motion nor be
allowed to unduly deposit, as the heart's action is perpetual in motion.
The work is complete of the heart if it delivers blood into the
exploring arteries. Each division must to do its part fully as a normal
heart does, or can in the greatest measure of health; and a normally
formed heart is just as much interested in the blood that is running
constantly for repairs and additions, as the whole system is on the
arteries for supply. Thus you must have perfection in shape first, and
from it to all parts as far as an artery reaches. All hindrances must be
kept away from the arteries great and small. Health permits of no
stopping of blood in either the vein or artery. If an artery cannot
unload its consents a strain follows, and as an artery must have room to
deposit its supplies it proceeds to build other vessels adjacent to the
points of obstruction.


ANEURISMS.

Some are builded to enormous sizes. We call them aneurisms or
accommodation chambers, builded by nature's constructing ability of the
arteries as deposits for blood. The artery should pass farther on, thus
you by reason must know an obstruction has limited the flow of blood,
and the tumor is only an effect, and obstruction is the cause of all
abnormal deposits, either from vein or artery. Unobstructed blood cannot
form a tumor, nor allow inharmony to dwell in any part of the system.
Flux is an effect, blood supply and circulation both at variation from
normal. An artery finds veins of bowels irritated and contracted to such
degree that arterial blood cannot enter veins with cargo of blood at
all, and deposits its blood at terminal points in mucous membrane of
bowels, and when membrane fails to hold all blood so delivered, then the
first blood which dies of asphyxia finds an outlet into the bowels to be
carried off and out by peristaltic actions. Thus you have a continuous
deposit and discharge for arterial blood until death stops the supply.




CHAPTER XII.

SCARLET FEVER AND SMALLPOX.

     As defined by Allopathy--Scarlet Fever as Defined by
     Osteopathy--Smallpox--Power to Drive Greater Than in Measles.


AS DEFINED BY ALLOPATHY.

"Scarlet fever begins with a short period of tired feeling. A short
period of chilly sensation, fullness of eyes and sore throat. In a few
hours fever begins with great heat of back of head. It soon extends all
over the body, sick stomach and vomiting generally accompany the
disease. Rash of a red color beginning on back, and extends to throat
and limbs. About the second or third day, the fever is very high, from
100 deg. to 104 deg. and generally lasts to fifth and seventh day, at
which time fever begins to diminish, with itching over the body. The
skin at this time throws off all of the dead scales that had been red
rash in the fore-part of the disease. Often the lining membranes of the
mouth, throat and tonsils slough and bleed. Also pus is often formed just
under the skin in front of the throat. Such cases usually die.[7]

   ALLOPATHY."

[Footnote 7: Very true, if treated by the medicine man.]


SCARLET FEVER AS DEFINED BY OSTEOPATHY.

Is a disease generally of the early spring and late fall seasons.
Generally comes with cold and damp weathers during east winds. It begins
with sore throat, chilly and tired feelings, followed with headache and
vomiting. In a few hours chilly feeling leaves and fever sets in very
high, burns your hands. The patient is rounded in chest, abdomen, face
and limbs by congestion of the fascia and all of the lymphatic glands.
This stagnation will soon begin its work of fermentation of the fluids
of fascia, then you see the rash. If you do not want to see the rash and
sloughing of throat, with a dead patient, I would advise you to train
your guns on the blood, nerves, and lymphatics of the fascia and stop
the cause at once, or quit.

   OSTEOPATHY.


SMALLPOX.

If we give a thought to the action of the electro-motor force, we would
be constrained to believe that a power that could drive gas through a
body of great density, would be much less than one that could force
lymph through the same density. The same of albumen.


POWER TO DRIVE GREATER THAN IN MEASLES.

Thus in smallpox the motor energy must be equal to the force that would
convey albumen through all tissues. Measles would be less, and so on
according to the thickness of the fluids present. Thus you see the power
to drive dead fluids from fascia must be much greater in smallpox than
in cases of measles. Then we must see why the pulse of smallpox is so
powerful during development of the pox. After killing the fluids by
retention in the fascia of the skin, a greater force yet is created by
hurting nerve fibers of fascia; then the motor energy appears and all
the powers of life go to help the arteries force fluids through the skin
and push to and leave them in the fascia of the skin to be eliminated as
best it can. In some parts elimination fails, such places are called
pox. They supurate and drop out leaving a pit (the pox mark). Now had
the nerves of the skin and fascia not been irritated to contract the
skin against the fascia passing its dead fluids through the excretory
ducts of the skin, we probably would have no eruption. It is not quite
reasonable to conclude that after the heart overloads the fascia and the
nerves lose their control by pressure of fluids, that all that is left
is chemical action to the production of pus, which throws it out of
fascia in intervening spaces? Then should the fascia have greater death
of its substances, we have one spot to run into others, and we have
"confluent smallpox."




CHAPTER XIII.

A CHAPTER OF WONDERS AND SOME VALUABLE QUESTIONS.

     Wonders on the Increase--What Is Life?--How Is Action
     Produced--Acquaint Yourself With the Machinery--Duty of the
     Osteopath--Formation of Sacrum--The Pelvis--Appearance of
     OEdema--Do All Diseases Have Appearance in OEdema.


WONDERS ON THE INCREASE.

Wonders are daily callers, and seem greatly on the increase during the
Eighteenth century. As we read history we learn that no one hundred
years of the past has produced wonders in such number and variety.
Stupid systems of government have given place to better and wiser.
Voyages of the ocean have had months by sail reduced to days by steam.
Journeys over land that would require six months by horse and ox, are
now accomplished in six days by rail. Our law, medical and other schools
of five and seven years, are now but two or three; and the graduates of
such schools are far superior in useful knowledge to those of the five
and seven. And no wonder at that, for the facilities for giving the
pupil an education are so far superior that the knowledge sought, can be
obtained in less time. Our schools are not intended to use the greatest
number of days that are allotted to man. But at this day schooling and
learning mean, to obtain useful knowledge in the quickest way that a
thoroughness can be obtained. If there is any method by which arithmetic
can be taught so as to master it in thirty days instead of thirty months
let us have it. We want knowledge, we are willing to pay for it, we want
all we pay for, and we want our heads kept out of the sausage-mill of
time wasting.

A great question now stands before us: What are the possibilities of
mind to improve our methods of gaining knowledge, shorten time, and
getting greater and better results? I am free to say the question is too
momentous to form an answer, as each day brings a new wonder, to the man
or woman who reasons on cause, and gives demonstrations by effects.


WHAT IS LIFE?

The philosopher who first asked that question no one knows. But all
intelligent persons are interested in the solution of this problem, at
least to know some tangible reason why it is called life; whether life
is personal or so arranged that it might be called an individualized
principle of nature.

I wish to think for a time on this line, because we should make a wise
handling of the machinery of the body.

If life in man has been formed to suit the size and duties of the being;
if life has a living and separate personage, then we should be governed
by such reasons as would give it the greatest chance to go on with its
labors in the bodies of man and beast.

We know by experience that a spark of fire will start the principles of
powder into motion, which, were it not stimulated by the positive
principle of father nature, which finds this germ lying quietly in the
womb of space, would be silently inactive for all ages, without being
able to move or help itself, save for the motor principle of life given
by the father of all motion.


HOW IS ACTION PRODUCED.

Right here we could and should ask the question: Is this action produced
by electricity put in motion, or is it the active principle that comes
as a spiritual man? If so, it is useless to try, or hope to know what
life is in its minutia. But we do know that life can only display its
natural forces by the visible action of the forms it produces.

If we inspect man as a machine, we find a complete building, a machine
that courts inspection and criticism. It demands a full exploration of
all its parts with their uses. Then the mind is asked to see or find the
connection between the physical, and the spiritual. By nature you can
reason on the roads that the powers of life are arranged to suit its
system of motion.

If life is an individualized personage, as we might express that
mysterious something, and it must have definite arrangements by which it
can be united and act with matter; then we are admonished to acquaint
ourselves with the arrangements of those natural connections, the one or
many, as they are connected to all parts of the completed being.

As motion is the first and only evidence of life, by this thought we are
conducted to the machinery through which life works to accomplish these
results.


ACQUAINT YOURSELF WITH THE MACHINERY.

If the brain be that division in which force is generated or stored, you
must at all hazards acquaint yourself with that structure of this
machine; trace the connection from brain to heart, from heart to lungs,
and other organs that can be acted upon by the brain, whose duty may be
to construct the fleshy and bony parts of the body. Trace from the brain
to the chemical laboratories, and note their action as they unite and
prepare blood and other fluids, that are used in the economy of this
vital, self-constructing and self-moving wonder, commonly known as man;
wherein life and matter do unite, and express their friendly relation
one with the other; and while this relation exists we have the living
man only, expressing and proving the relation that can exist between
life and matter, from the lowest living atom, to the greatest worlds.
They can only express form and action by this law. Harmony only dwells
where obstructions do not exist.


DUTY OF THE OSTEOPATH.

The Osteopath finds here the field in which he can dwell forever. His
duties as a philosopher admonish him, that life and matter can be
united, and that union cannot continue with any hindrance to the free
and absolute motion. Therefore his duty is to keep away from the track
all that will hinder the complete passage of the forces of the nervous
system, that by that power the blood may be delivered and adjusted, to
keep the system in normal condition. Here is your duty; do it well, if
you wish to succeed.


FORMATION OF SACRUM.

We believe only when we do not know. Belief and doubt are equal terms.
If we believe the sacrum is formed by a local system, then we can or
will have cause to believe that the rectum and colon appear after the
outer skin is in process of forming. For want of the truths we are left
in speculative doubt. I believe the lower bowels are formed by local
machinery that receives and appropriates to the purpose of construction
of such parts or organs as nature designs to be used there. If we
dissect a chicken as soon as hatched we will find the colon beginning at
rectum and complete in form, but not connected to the small intestines.


THE PELVIS.

To get more directly at the point I want to make I will say I have some
reasons to believe that the lower bowels are builded from rectum to the
vermiform appendix, by acts of pelvis. It may be well to state that I
have seen formation of rectum and colon in the chicken, before the small
intestines were visible at all. Then in same chicken I saw, liver, lung,
crop and gizzard, and only one artery in the region of the small
intestines. From this I was led to believe that the pelvis did much of
the forming of the viscera. If so, then we could look for much relief
through the system of the pelvis.


APPEARANCE OF OEDEMA.

OEdema is the one word that appears to be at the first showing of life
and death in animal forms. Previous to death by general swelling of
system, a watery swelling of fascia and lymphatics, even to those of
nerve fibers. If a disease should destroy life by withholding all
fluids, we can trace such cause in the beginning to a time when there
was watery swelling of the centers of nerves of nutrition, to such
amount as to cut off nerve supply until sensation ceased to renovate and
keep off accumulating fluids so long that fermentation did the work of
heating till all fluids had dried up, and the channels of supply closed
by adhesive inflammation, and death follows by the law of general
atrophy.


DO ALL DISEASES HAVE BEGINNING IN OEDEMA?

To assert that all diseases have their beginning in oedema may be wide
in range, but we often find one principle to rule over much territory.
"Instance:" Mind is the supreme ruler of all beings, from the mites of
life to the monsters of the land and sea. Thus we see a ruling principle
is without limit. The same of numbers. By heat all metals melt to
fluidity; acids must have oxygen to begin as solvents in most metals. We
only speak imperfectly of some common laws to prepare the student to
think on the line of probabilities as I hold them out for consideration.
Suppose we begin at the atoms of fluids such as enter to construct
animal or vegetable forms, and pen up till decomposition begins. By
such delay does not nature call a halt and refuse to obey the laws of
construction and let all other supplies pile up even to death? Is not
all this the result of oedema? OEdema surely begins with the first
tardy atom of matter.

Pneumonia begins by its oedematous accumulations of dead atoms, even
to the death of the whole body, all having found a start in atoms only.


QUESTIONS FOR THE OSTEOPATH.

We will close this chapter by propounding a few questions which the
Osteopath should keep in mind.

Are the human and animal forms complete as working machines?

Has nature furnished man with powers to make his bones; give them the
needed shapes of durable material, strong in kind?

Does a section in nature's law provide fastenings to hold these to one
another?

Then another question arises: How will this body move, and where and how
is the force applied?

Where and how is this force obtained?

How is it generated and supplied to these parts of motion?

What makes these muscles, ligaments, nerves, veins, arteries?

Are they self-forming, or has nature prepared machinery to make them?

Does animal life contain knowledge and force to construct all of the
parts of man?

Can it run the machine after it has finished it?

By what power does it move?

Is there a blood vessel running to all parts of this body to supply all
these demands?

If it has a battery of force, where is it?

What does it use for force?

Is it electricity? If so how does it collect and use this substance?

How does it convey its powers to any or all places?

How does the man keep warm without fire?

How does he build and lose flesh all the time?

Where and how is the supply made and delivered to proper places?

How is it applied and what holds it to its place when adjusted?

What makes it build the house of life?

Do demand and supply govern the work? If not, what does?

Are the laws of animal life sufficient to do all this work of building
and repairing wastes and keep it in running condition?

If it does, what can man do or suggest to help it?

Is this machine capable of being run fast or slow if need be?

Does man have in him some kind of chemical laboratory that can turn out
such products as he needs to fill all his physical demands?

If by heat, exercise, or any other cause he gets warm, can that
chemistry cool him to normal?

If too cold can it warm him? Can it adjust him to heat and cold?

If so, how is it done? Is the law of life and longevity fully vindicated
in man's make up?




CHAPTER XIV.

HAS MAN DEGENERATED?

     The Advent of Man--Care of the Stock Raiser--Mental Degeneration
     Makes It Unpleasant for an Original Thinker--Original Thinkers of
     the Ancients--Methods of Healing--Failure of Allopathy--Primitive
     Man--Evidences of Prehistoric Man--Mental Dwarfage.


THE ADVENT OF MAN.

The exact time when man's foot appeared on the earth, no record shows. A
knowledge of his advent might be profitable. The unwritten history of
the human races with the genius or lack of genius, might to us be an
open book of knowledge. As it is not supposable that the mind of man has
just become observingly active in the last few centuries, absolute
evidence of purer and deeper reason than we have been able to present,
stand recorded on the faces of many valuable "lost arts" which we have
never been able to equal. Is it not very reasonable to suppose that the
powers of mind have wonderfully degenerated from some cause?


CARE OF THE STOCK RAISER.

The stock raiser carefully preserves the best and most healthy of the
males and females of his flocks and herds for breeding purposes, that
their offspring might be healthy and well developed, for the purposes
for which he raises them. As a result he raises stock from the poultry
house up, with marked improvement in form, strength and usefulness.
Should he be foolish enough to kill off all the healthy and well
developed males as they appear in his herds of cattle and other stock,
for one or two centuries, would any one with average intelligence
suppose that the standard of animals would or could be kept up, by
breeding from the unfortunate stock, that had been pierced through the
lungs while fighting with more powerful animals. If for breeding
purposes he would save calves, colts, lambs, pigs, goats or any other
young males to breed from, that had had a leg frozen off, one or both
eyes plucked out, necks and ears torn by panthers, what would you think
of the man's sanity?

On this line we would ask what has been the procedure of all nations?
Has it not been to select the strong and healthy males, drive them out
to the field of battle, destroy a million or more of the strongest men,
as our war of the sixties shows. Since that war closed the fathers of
our children are mainly the crippled, worn out, and degenerated physical
wrecks, with the assistance of the refused, who for lack of physical
ability were barred from entering the United States' service. Such
physical and mental wrecks are the fathers of the children born during
the last thirty years. Every healthy young lady who married and became a
mother after the early sixties, had to select a husband from a war or
hereditary wreck. From that degenerated stock of human beings our
asylums are filled, and the beams of the gallows pulled down by the
weight of the bodies of those mental dwarfs. Run this train of reason
back for a few hundred or thousand of years,--this degenerating force,
bearing upon the offspring, and is it a wonder that we have physical and
mental wrecks all over the country?


MENTAL DEGENERATION MAKES IT UNPLEASANT FOR THE ORIGINAL THINKER.

Now if we have been mentally degenerating, killing our best men back for
a few thousand years time, and still have a few left who are fairly good
reasoners, what was their mental powers then, compared with now? They
could think from native ability; we only through acquired ability by our
methods of education. Should an original thinker occasionally appear
from the crippled and maimed, he will have much that is unpleasant to
contend with, unless he is generous enough to credit the cause to an
effect produced by the lack of mental and physical forces in the sires
just described. A man or woman who is able to reason, cannot afford to
wear out his or her physical and mental forces by spending time in
tiresome discussions with such blank masses, who are very fortunate to
have intelligence enough to make a living under the methods that require
the least mental action.

It would not be manly nor lady like to allow a feeling of combattiveness
to arise and spend your forces on such persons. Pre-natal causes have
dropped them where they are, and a philosopher knows he must submit to
the conditions, and he is sorrowful in place of vengeful and
vindicative, and all that is left for him to do is to trim his lamps and
let the lights defend themselves.


ORIGINAL THINKERS OF THE ANCIENTS.

On this line we have much to think of. Anciently they did think: Great
minds existed then, as is evidenced by the architecture displayed in
constructing temples and pyramids. As in philosophy, chemistry, and
mathematics, they stand to-day as living facts of their intelligence. In
some ways we are equal and even surpass the ancients. Before the
establishment of religious and political governments, national and
tribal creeds, to sustain which the powerful minds and bodies of
thousands and millions have been slain and their wise councils
prohibited by death. Reason says under the circumstances we must kindly
make and do the best we can in our day and time. No doubt their religion
was better than ours, before they began to fight about their gods and
governments.


METHODS OF HEALING.

Some evidence crops out now and then that their methods of healing were
natural and wisely applied, and crowned with good results. As far as
history speaks of the ancient healing arts they were logical,
philosophical, good in results and harmless. It is true enough that we
have great systems of chemistry that are useful in the mechanical arts,
but very limited in their uses in the healing arts. In fact, a very
great per cent of the gray-haired philosophers of all medical schools,
unhesitatingly assert that the world would be better off without them.
These conclusions are sent forth by competent and honest investigators,
who have tested all known methods and medicines, and carefully observed
the results from a quarter to a half a century. Let us call it "a
trade," as the use of drugs is not a science.

The author will now say, the health hunter in a majority of cases, when
he administers drugs, gives one dose for health and nine for the dollar.

As it becomes necessary to throw off oppressive governments, it becomes
just as necessary to throw off other useless customs, without which no
substitute has ever been received.


FAILURE OF ALLOPATHY.

Allopathy, a school of medicine known and fostered by all nations, drove
on with its exploring teams; gave up the search, went into camp and
builded temples to the god who purged, puked, perspired, opiated, drank
whiskey and other stimulants; destroyed its thousands, ruined nations,
established whiskey saloons, opium dens, insane asylums, naked mothers
and hungry babies, and still cries aloud, and says: "Come unto me and I
will give you rest. I have opium, morphine, and whiskey by the barrel. I
am the god of all healing knowledge, and want to be so recognized by
people and statute. I do not wish to be annoyed by Eclecticism,
Homoeopathy, Christian science, massage, Swedish movements, nor
Osteopathy. I do not like Osteopathy any better than I do a tiger. It
scratches me and tears away all my disciples. I cannot destroy it. It
uses neither opium nor whiskey, and it is impossible to catch it asleep.
It scratches us, and has scratched our power out of four states during
the last twelve months, with no telling where it will scratch next time.
We must prepare for more war, I have heard from my scouts that on its
flag the inscription reads thus: 'No quarters for allopathy in
particular and none at all for any schools of medicine farther than
surgery, and war to the hilt on three-fourths of that as practiced in
the present day. The use of the knife in everything and for everything
must be stopped; not by statute law, but through a higher education of
the masses, which will give them more confidence in nature's ability to
heal.'"


PRIMITIVE MAN.

It is reasonable to suppose that the mind that constructed man was fully
competent to undertake and complete the being to suit the purpose for
which he was designed. After giving him physical perfection in every
limb, organ, or part of his body, it is reasonable to suppose, that at
that time, he gave him all the mental powers needed for all purposes
during the life of his race, and with that perfection in the physical,
it is supposable he approached very nearly to intellectual perfection.
He was a mathematician, not by collegiate process, but by native
ability. He did not have to take a course in a university to study
chemistry, because of the fact that he was a chemist when he was born.
Possibly he could speak or understand all languages spoken by the human
tongue, from the powers of his mind, which occupied a pure and healthy
physique. In a word he was well made and fully endowed with all the
physical and mental forces necessary to the whole journey of his life.
Now a question arises: "When did he begin to degenerate physically and
mentally?" Let us reason some on this line, which seems to be a rather
solid foundation, and as history is young itself, and has imperfectly
recorded only such events as have transpired during a few centuries,
with records imperfectly preserved.


EVIDENCES OF PREHISTORIC MAN.

We see evidences all along the journey of prehistoric man's life, though
the being and his bones have been mostly obliterated; we see close to
his bony remains the stone axe, the flint-dart. We find acres of ground
in many places close to mounds and caves, with countless millions of
slivers that have been scaled from flints and formed to suit war
purposes; while the many bones that are found in caves, heaps and piles,
indicate that many thousands fell in mortal combat then and there.
Possibly they were old in the skilled arts of war at that day. Their
great and powerful men, who should have been parents of the coming
generations, were slain and destroyed and the conquered became the
captives and slaves of the more powerful, with all opportunities for
mental development suppressed. Other nations and tribes willingly
entered the bloody fields of battle, with nothing to report but the
death of the best physically formed men, and leaving the propagation of
the race or races to be kept up by those who were left behind as
unqualified to go into battle, for lack of strength of either body or
mind.

This process of destroying the mentally and physically great has been
kept up to the limits of our history's record. We have to go to schools
about one-half of our time in order to cultivate and stimulate our
mental energies sufficiently well, that we may follow the ordinary
business pursuits of life.


MENTAL DWARFAGE.

Without worrying the patience of the reader any further, we will ask him
if it is not reasonable that during all the past thousands of years,
that men have fought over their gods and governments, has it not
produced the mental dwarfage from the causes he has had to face? Our
professional men are only imitators of one another. They must spend
years in school because of a lack of native ability. This is our
condition, and we must make the best we can of it. Most of our learned
men, so-called, at the present day, stand upon heaps of mental rubbish.
You seldom see in an editor's columns any evidence of mental greatness.
He clips, quotes and sells his wisdom. He takes up some hobby,
religious or scientific. He lauds his own religious views; his
scientific ideas he wishes embalmed for the use of future generations.
His law is _the_ law. His medicine is God's pills, notwithstanding he is
the laughing stock of all who know him. I want to be good to them. I
expect to be good to them, as they are suffering from the effects of
pre-natal causes, thrown upon them by their ancestors for thousands of
years. By those causes they have been possibly wounded worse than I
have, and I do not expect to spend any time in combats with mental
dwarfs; political, religious, or scientific bigots. If I can
successfully run my boat over the riffles of time, I shall credit it to
good luck, not native ability, for I, too, feel what they should,--the
deep plowings of mental dwarfage, that is the result of killing all the
great and good men for ages.




CHAPTER XV.

OSTEOPATHIC TREATMENT.

     Five Points--Visceral List--Care in Treating the Spinal
     Column--Most Important Chapter--Perfect Drainage--A Natural Cure.


FIVE POINTS.

The five points of observation will cover easily the whole body, and we
cannot omit any one of them, and successfully examine any disease of the
system. Local injuries are, however, an exception to this rule, and even
a local hurt often causes general effect. Suppose a fall should jar the
lumbar vertebra, and push it at some articulation, front, back, or
laterally; say the lumbar, with one or two short ribs turned down
against the lumbar nerves with a prolapsed and loosened diaphragm,
pressing heavily on the abdominal aorta, vena cava, and thoracic duct;
have you not found cause to stop or derange the circulation of blood in
arteries, veins, lymphatics and all other organs below diaphragm? Then
heart trouble would be the natural result. Fibroid tumors, painful
monthlies, constipation, diabetis, dyspepsia or any trouble of the
system that could come from bad blood would be natural results, because
lymph is too old to be pure when it enters the lungs for purifying. If
blood or chyle is kept too long below the diaphragm, it becomes diseased
before it reaches the lungs, and after renovation, but little good blood
is left. Then the dead matter is separated from blood and blown out at
the lungs while in vapor. Thus nutriment is not great enough to keep up
normal supply. In this stage the patient is low in flesh and feeble
generally, because of trouble with blood and chyle to pass normally
through the diaphragm.


VISCERAL LIST.

The failure of free action of blood produces general debility,
congestion, low types of fever, dropsy, constipation, tumefaction and on
to the whole list of visceral of diseases.

From this we are called to the pelvis. If the innominate bones are
twisted on sacrum or are driven too high or too low, an injury to the
sacral system of blood and nerves would be cause equal to congestion,
inflammation of womb or bladder-diseases, with a crippled condition of
all the spinal nerves. This would be cause enough to produce hysteria,
and on to the whole list of diseases to spinal injuries. The Osteopath
has great demands for his powers of reason when he considers the
relation of diseases generally to the pelvis; and this knowledge he
must have before his work can be attended with success.

As I said, five points comprise the fields in which the Osteopath must
search. I have given you quite pointedly and at length, hints on spine
and sacrum which cover the territory below the diaphragm. In conclusion
I will simply refer you to the chest, neck and brain, and say, "let your
search light ever shine bright on the brain." On it we must depend for
power. About all nerves do run through the neck and branch off to supply
both above and below, to do their parts in animal life, to the heart,
brain and sum total of man and beast. Search faithfully for cause of
diseases in head, neck, chest, spine and pelvis; for all organs, limbs
and parts are directly related to and depend on these five localities to
which I have just called your attention.

With your knowledge of anatomy, I am sure you can practice and be
successful, and should be in all cases over which Osteopathy is supposed
to preside.


CARE IN TREATING THE SPINAL CORD.

I want to offer you the facts, not advice, but pure and well sustained
facts, the only witnesses that ever enter the courts of truth. A spinal
cord is a fact; you see it--thus a fact. That which you can see, feel,
hear, smell or taste is a fact, and the knowledge of the ability of any
one fact to accomplish any one thing, how it accomplishes it and for
what purpose, is a truth sought for in philosophy. The spinal cord is
the present fact for consideration. You see it, you feel it, thus you
have two facts with which you can start to obtain a knowledge of the use
of this spinal cord. In it you have one common straight cylinder which
is filled with an unknown substance, and by an unknown power wisely
directed. It is wisely formed, located, and protected. It throws off
branches which are wisely located. They have bundles, many and few; they
are connected to their support, which is the brain, by a continuous cord
in length and form to suit. After it has concluded throwing off branches
at local places for special purposes, then like a flashlight, it throws
off a bundle of branches called horse-tail plexus, _caudae equinae_,
which simply signifies the many branches that convey fluids and
influences to the extremities, to execute the vital work for which they
are formed and located. While the laws of life and their procedure to
execute and accomplish the work designed by nature for them to do, is
mysterious and to the finite mind incomprehensible, you can only see
what they do or perform, after the work is done and ready for your
inspection.


HOW TO TREAT THE SPINAL COLUMN.

Now as we are dealing with the omnipresent nerve principle of animal
life, I will tell you this one serious truth, and support it by the fact
of observation. To treat the spine, and thereby irritate the spinal cord
oftener than once or twice a week will cause the vital assimilation to
be perverted, and become the death-producing excretor, by producing the
abortion of the living molecules of life, before fully matured, while in
the cellular system, which lies immediately under the lymphatics.

Your patients will linger long from the change of the nutrient ducts to
throw off their dead matter into the excretories, which death was caused
by the undue, or too many treatments of the spinal cord. If you will
allow yourself to think for a moment, or think at all of the spinal cord
being irritated, and what effect it will have on the uterus you will
realize that I have told you a truth, and produced an array of facts to
stand by that truth. Many of your patients are well six months before
they are discharged. They are kept on hands because they are weak, and
they are weak, because you keep them so from irritating the spinal cord.
Throw off your goggles and receive the rays of the sunlight which
forever stand in the bosom of reason.


MOST IMPORTANT CHAPTER OF ALL.

This is the most important chapter of this book, because at this point
the engine of life is turned over to you as an engineer and by you it is
expected to be wisely conducted on its journey.

Your responsibility here is doubled. Your first position is that of a
master mechanic, who is capable of drawing plans and writing minutely a
specification whereby the engineer may know what a well constructed
machine is in every particular. He knows the parts and relations of both
as constructor and operator, and you are supposed to be the foreman in
the shop of repairs. The living person is the engine, nature the
engineer, and you the master mechanic.

This being your position it is expected that you will carefully inspect
all parts of the engines run into your repair shop, note all variations
from the truly normal, and adjust from those variations as nearly as
possible to the conditions of the true specimen that stands in the shop.


PERFECT DRAINAGE.

At this point it will be proper to suppose a case by way of
illustration. Suppose by some accident the bones of the neck should be
thrown at variance from the normal to a bend or twist. We may then
expect inharmony in the circulation of the blood to the head and face
with all the organs and glands above the neck. We will find imperfect
supply of blood and other fluids to the head. We may expect swelling of
head and face with local or general misery. Thus you have a cause for
headache, dizziness, blindness, enlarged tonsils, sore tongue, loss of
sight, hearing, memory, and on through the list of head diseases, all
because of perverted circulation of the fluids of the brain proper of
any local division. It is important to have perfect drainage, for
without it, the good results from a treatment cannot be expected to
follow your efforts to relieve diseases above the neck.


WHAT TREATING MEANS.

Here I want to emphasize that the word treat has but one meaning, that
is to know you are right, and do your work accordingly. I will only
hint, and would feel embarrassed to go any farther than to hint to you,
the importance of an undisturbed condition of the five known kinds of
nerves, namely: sensation, motion, nutrition, voluntary and involuntary,
all of which you must labor to keep in perpetual harmony while treating
any disease of the head, neck, chest, abdomen, pelvis, spine and limbs.

If you would allow yourself to reason at all, you must know that
sensation must be normal and always on guard to give notice by local or
general misery, of unnatural accumulation of the circulating fluids.
Each set of nerves must be free to act and do their part. Your duty as a
master mechanic is to know that the engine kept is in so perfect a
condition that there will be no functional disturbance to any nerve,
vein, or artery that supplies and governs the skin, the fascia, the
muscle, the blood or any fluid that should freely circulate to sustain
life and renovate the system from deposits that would cause what we call
disease.


A NATURAL CURE.

Your Osteopathic knowledge has surely taught you, that with an intimate
acquaintance with the nerve and blood supply, you can arrive at a
knowledge of the hidden cause of disease, and conduct your treatment to
a successful termination. This is not by your knowledge of chemistry,
but by the absolute knowledge of what is in man. What is normal, and
what abnormal, what is effect and how to find the cause. Do you ever
suspect renal or bladder trouble without first receiving knowledge from
your patient, that there is soreness and tenderness in the region of the
kidneys at some point along the spine. By this knowledge you are invited
to explore the spine for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is
normal or not. If by your intimate acquaintance and observance of a
normal spine you should detect an abnormal form although it be small,
you are then admonished to look out for disease of kidneys, bladder or
both, from the discovered cause for disturbance of the renal nerves by
such displacement, or some slight variation from the normal in the
articulation of the spine. If this is not worthy of your attention, your
mind is surely too crude to observe those fine beginnings that lead to
death. Your skill would be of little use in incipient cases of Bright's
disease of the kidneys. Has not your acquaintance with the human body
opened your mind's eye to observe that in the laboratory of the human
body, the most wonderful chemical results are being accomplished every
day, minute and hour of your life? Can that laboratory be running in
good order and tolerate the forming of a gall or bladder stone? Does not
the body generate acids, alkalies, substances and fluids necessary to
wash out all impurities? If you think an unerring God has made all those
necessary preparations, why not so assert, and stand upon that stone?

You cannot do otherwise, and not betray your ignorance to the thinking
world. If in the human body you can find the most wonderful chemical
laboratory mind can conceive of, why not give more of your time to that
subject, that you may obtain a better understanding of its workings?
Can you afford to treat your patients without such qualification? Is it
not ignorance of the workings of this Divine law that has given birth to
the foundationless nightmare that now prevails to such an alarming
extent all over civilization, that a deadly drug will prove its efficacy
in warding off disease in a better way than has been prescribed by the
intelligent God, who has formulated and combined life, mind and matter
in such a manner that it becomes the connecting link between a world of
mind, and that element known as matter? Can a deep philosopher do
otherwise than conclude that nature has placed in man all the qualities
for his comfort and longevity? Or will he drink that which is deadly,
and cast his vote for the crucifixion of knowledge?




CHAPTER XVI.

REASONING TESTS.

     The Vermiform Appendix--Operating for Appendicitis--Expelling Power
     of the Vermiform Appendix--Care Exercised in Making
     Assertions--Reasoning Tests--A List of Unexplained
     Diseases--Concluding Remarks.


THE VERMIFORM APPENDIX.

At the present time more than at any other period since the birth of
Christ, the medical and surgical world have centralized their minds for
the purpose of relieving locally inside, below the kidney of the male or
female, excruciating pain, which appears in both sexes in the region
above described.

From some cause, possibly justifiable, it has been decided to open the
human body and explore the region just below the right kidney in search
of the cause of this trouble. Such explorations have been made upon the
dead first. Small seeds and other substances have been found in the
vermiform appendix, which is a hollow tube over an inch in length. These
discoveries, as found in the dead subject, have led to explorations in
the same location in the living. In some of the cases, though very few,
seeds and other substances have been found in the vermiform appendix,
supposed to be the cause of local or general inflammation of the
appendix. Some have been successfully removed, and permanent relief
followed the operation. These explorations and successes in finding
substances in the vermiform appendix, their removal, and successful
recovery in some cases, have led to what may properly be termed a hasty
system of diagnosis, and it has become very prevalent, and resorted to
by the physicians of many schools, under the impression that the
vermiform appendix is of no known use, and that the human being is just
as well off without it.


OPERATING FOR APPENDICITIS.

Therefore it is resolved, that as nothing positive is known of the
trouble in the location above described, it is guessed that it is a
disease of the vermiform appendix. Therefore they etherize and dissect
down for the purpose of exploring, to ascertain if the guess is right or
wrong. In the diagnosis this is a well-defined case of appendicitis; the
surgeon's knife is driven through the quivering flesh in great eagerness
in search of the vermiform appendix. The bowels are rolled over and
around in search of the appendix. Sometimes some substances are found in
it; but often to the chargrin of the exploring physician, it is found to
be in a perfectly healthy and natural condition, and so seldom is it
found impact with seeds or any substance whatever, that as a general
rule it is a useless and dangerous experiment. The per cent of deaths
caused by the knife and ether, and the permanently crippled, will
justify the assertion that it would be far better for the human race if
they lived and died in ignorance of appendicitis. A few genuine cases
might die from that cause; but if the knife were the only known remedy,
it were better that one should occasionally die than to continue this
system, at least until the world recognizes a relief which is absolutely
safe, without the loss of a drop of blood, that has for its foundation
and philosophy a fact based upon the longitudinal contractile ability of
the appendix itself, which is able to eject by its natural forces any
substances that may by an unnatural move be forced into the appendix.[8]

[Footnote 8: My first Osteopathic treatment for appendicitis was in
1877, at which time I operated on a Mr. Surratt and gave permanent
relief. During the early eighties I treated and permanently cured Mrs
Emily Pickler of Kirksville, mother of our representative, S. M.
Pickler, and mother of ex-congressman John A. Pickler of South Dakota.
The infirmary has had bad cases of appendicitis probably running up into
hundreds without failing to relieve and cure a single case. The ability
of the appendix to receive and discharge foreign substances is taught in
the American School of Osteopathy and is successfully practiced by its
diplomates. In the case of Mr. Surratt I found lateral twist of lumbar
bones; I adjusted spine, lifted bowels, and he got well. When I was
called to Mrs. Pickler she had been put on light diet, by the surgeon,
preparatory to the knife. She soon recovered under my treatment without
any surgical operation and is alive and well to this date.]


EXPELLING POWER OF THE VERMIFORM APPENDIX.

To a philosopher such questions as this must arise: Has the appendix at
its entrance a sphincter muscle similar in action to that of the rectum
and oesophagus? Has it the power to contract and dilate?--contract and
shorten in its length and eject all substances when the nerves are in a
normal condition? And where is the nerve that failed to execute the
expulsion of any substance that may enter the cavity of the appendix?
Has God been so forgetful as to leave the appendix in such condition as
to receive foreign bodies without preparing it by contraction or
otherwise to throw out such substances? If He has He surely forgot part
of His work. So reason has concluded for me, and on that line I have
proceeded to operate for twenty-five years without pain or misery to the
patient, and given permanent relief in all cases that have come to me.
With the former diagnosis of doctors and surgeons that appendicitis was
the malady, and the choice of relief was the knife or death, or possibly
both, many such cases have come for Osteopathic treatment, and
examination has revealed that in every case there has been previous
injury to some set of spinal nerves, caused by jars, strains or falls.
Every case of appendicitis, gall or renal stones can be traced to some
such cause. These principles I have proclaimed and thought for
twenty-five years.


CARE EXERCISED IN MAKING ASSERTIONS.

We should use much caution in our assertions that nature had made its
work so complete in animal forms and furnished them with such wisely
prepared principles that they could produce and administer remedies to
suit, and not leave the body to find them. Should we so conclude and
find by experiment that man is so arranged, and wisely furnished by
deity as to ferret out disease, purify and keep the temple of life in
ease and health; we must use great care when we assert such is not
undeniably true up to the present. The opposite opinion has had full
sway for twenty centuries at least, and man has by habit, long usage,
and ignorance so adjusted his mind to submit to customs of the great
past that should he try, without previous training, to reason and bring
his mind to such altitude of thought of the greatness and wisdom of the
infinite, he might become insane or fall back in a stupor, and exist
only as a living mental blank in the great ocean of life, where beings
dwell without minds to govern their actions. It would be a great
calamity to have all the untrained minds shocked so seriously as to
cause them to lose the mite of reason they now have, and be sent back
once more to dwell in Darwin's protoplasm. I tell you there is danger,
and we must be careful and show the people small stars, and but one at a
time, till they can begin to reason and realize that God has done all
that the wisest can attribute to Him.


REASONING TESTS.

There is but one method of reasoning. That method is by the laws
governing the subject to be reasoned upon.

Reasoning is the action of the mind while hunting for truths.


THE ABDOMEN.

As we are about to camp close to the abdomen for a season of
explorations and a more reasonable knowledge of its organs and their
functions, we will search its geography first, and find its location on
the body or globe of life. We find a boundary line established by the
general surveyor, about the middle of the body, called the diaphragm.
This line has a very strong wall or striated muscle that can and does
dilate and contract to suit for breathing, and quantities of food that
may be stored for a time in stomach and bowels for use. The abdomen is
much longer than wide. In short, it is a house or shop builded for
manufacturing purposes. In it we find the machinery that produces rough
blood or chyle, and sends it to heart and lungs to be finished to
perfect living blood, to supply and sustain all the organs of this
division. This diaphragm or wall has several openings through which
blood and nutriment pass to and from abdomen to heart, lungs and brain.
I want to draw your special attention to the fact that this diaphragm
must be truly normal. It must be anchored and held in its true position
without any variation, and in order that you shall fully understand what
I mean, I will ask you to go with me mentally to all the ribs, beginning
with the sternum, see attachments, follow across with a downward course
to the attachments of this great muscular septum to the lower lumbar
region, where the right crus receives a branch or strong muscle from the
left side, and the left crus receives a muscle from the right which
becomes one common muscle known as the left crus, the same of the right
crus receiving a muscle or tendon from the left, which you will easily
comprehend from examining descriptive cuts in Gray, Morris, Gerrish, or
any well illustrated work of anatomy. You see at once a chance for
constriction of the aorta by the muscles under which it passes, causing
without doubt much of the disease known as palpitation of the heart,
which is only a bouncing back of the blood that has been stopped at the
crura. Farther away from the spine near the center of the diaphragm we
find the return opening through this wall, provided to accommodate the
vena cava. To the left a few inches below the vena cava we find another
opening provided for the oesophagus and its nerves; like the aorta, it
has two muscles of the diaphragm crossing directly between oesophagus
and the aorta, in such shape as to be able to produce powerful
prohibitory constriction to normal swallowing.


A LIST OF UNEXPLAINED DISEASES.

At this point I will draw your attention to what I consider is the cause
of a whole list of hitherto unexplained diseases, which I think are only
effects, caused by the blood and other fluids being prohibited from
doing normal service by constrictions at the various openings of the
diaphragm. Thus prohibition of free action of the thoracic duct would
produce congestion of receptaculum chyli, because of not being able to
discharge its contents as fast as received. Is it not reasonable to
suppose a ligation of the thoracic duct at the diaphragm would retain
this chyle until it would be diseased by age and fermentation, and be
thrown off into the substances of other organs of the abdomen and set up
new growths, such as enlargement of the uterus, ovaries, kidneys, liver,
spleen, pancreas, omentum, lymphatics, cellular membranes, and all that
is known as flesh and blood below the diaphragm? Have you not reason to
explore and demand a deeper and more thorough anatomical knowledge of
the diaphragm and its power to produce disease while in an abnormal
condition, which can be caused by irritations, wounds or hurts, from the
base of the brain to the coccyx? Remember this is an anatomical and
philosophical question that will demand your attention to the mechanical
formation, physiological action and the unobstructed privileges of
fluids when prepared in the laboratory of nature, to be sent at once to
their ordained destination, before such substances are diseased or dead
with age. You must remember that you have been well drilled, or talked
out of patience in the room of symptomatology and all you have learned
is, something ails the kidneys, and are told their contents when
analyzed are not normally pure urine. In urinalisis you are told "here
is sugar," "here is fat," "here is iron," "here is pus," "here is
albumen," and this is diabetis, this is Bright's disease, but no
suggestion is handed to the student's mind to make him know that these
numerous variations from normal urine are simply effects, and the
diaphragm has caused all the trouble, by first being irritated from
hurts, by ribs falling, spinal strains, wounds and on from the coccyx to
the base of the brain. Symptomatology is very wide and wise in putting
this and that together and giving it names, but fails to give the cause
of all these abdominal lesions. Never for once has it said or intimated
that the diaphragm is prolapsed by misplaced ribs to which it is
attached, or that it is diseased by hurts of spine and nerves above its
own location. Allow yourself to think of the universality of the
distribution of the superior cervical ganglion and other nerves which
are of such great importance that I will by permission insert in the
last chapter of this book a description of that great system of the
sympathetic nerves by Dr. Wm. Smith, whose superior knowledge of anatomy
makes him eminently qualified to describe the location and uses of this
great sympathetic system of the nerves of life.


CONCLUDING REMARKS.

As you read his able essay remember there are four other sets of nerves
equal to, and just as important in their divisions of life, which are
the motor, nutrient, voluntary and involuntary. All of which you as an
engineer must know, and by proper adjustment of the body give them
unlimited power to perform their separate and united parts in sustaining
life and health. Now as I have tried to place into your hands a compass,
flag and chain that will lead you from effect to cause of disease in
any part or organ of the whole abdomen I hope that many mysteries which
have hung over your mental horizon will pass away, and give you abiding
truths, placed upon the everlasting rock of cause and effect. You have
as little use for old symptomatology as an Irishman has for a cork when
the bottle is empty. Osteopathy is knowledge, or it is nothing.




CHAPTER XVII.

OBSTETRICS.

     Overloading--Similarity of Stomach and Womb--Births--Preparation
     for Delivery--Caution--Lasceration Need Not Occur--Care of
     Cord--Severing Cord--Putting on Belly Band--Delivery of
     Afterbirth--Preparing for Mother's Comfort--Post-Delivery
     Hemorrhage--Treatment for--Food for Mother--Treatment for Sore
     Breast.


OVERLOADING.

When in the course of human events and actions of life, a woman
disregards the laws of nature to such an extent as to overload the
stomach beyond its powers and limits; or another way to present the
thought, we will say, if you fill the stomach so full as to occupy all
space, or so much of the space as to cripple the laws of digestion and
retain the food, the decomposition sets up an irritation of the nerves
of mucous membrane to such a degree as to cause sickness and vomiting,
or any other method of disgorging the stomach, which is the natural
process to unload an overloaded vessel. When the nerves cannot take up
nutrition, they will then take up destruction and other elements which
are detrimental to the process of nutrition, and there is no other
process for relief but to unload. The loading that has been deposited
in the stomach was for the purpose of sustaining a being. The stomach
itself is a sack. When filled to its greatest capacity, it irritates all
the surroundings, and in return they irritate the stomach. Thus it
unloads naturally for relief. Now we wish to treat of another vessel
similar in size, similar in all its actions, which receives nourishment
for a being, which nourishment is contained in the blood, and conveyed
from the channels commonly known as uterine arteries. To all intents and
purposes this nourishment is taken there to sustain animal life, after
having constructed the machinery then it appropriates the blood to the
growth and existence of a human being. One is the womb, the other the
stomach. The placenta in the womb is provided with all the machinery
necessary to the preparation of blood, such as is used for all purposes
in forming and developing a child. Which is the stomach? Which is the
womb? and what is the difference? Both receive and distribute
nourishment to sustain animal life. Both get sick, both vomit when
irritated and discharge their loading by the natural law of "throw up"
and "throw down." Now note the difference and govern yourselves
accordingly. One is mid-wifery, or treatment of the lower stomach during
gestation and delivery. The other is the upper stomach that takes
coarser material and refines the unrefined substances, keeps the outer
man in form and being; the other contains the inner man or child, and by
the law of ejection, when it becomes an irritant, it is thrown out by
the nerves that govern the muscles of ejection.


BIRTHS.

To illustrate: I will say, just as long as digestion and assimilation
keep in harmony and the mother generates good blood in abundance, the
child grows, and by nature the womb is willing to let the work of
building the body of the child go on indefinitely; but nature has placed
all the functions of animal life under laws that are absolute and must
be obeyed. We by reason are asked to note the similarity of the stomach
and the womb, as both receive and pass nutriment to a body for
assimilation and growth. When a stomach gets overloaded, sickness
begins, as digestion and assimilation has stopped, then the decaying
matter is taken up by the terminal nerves, and conveyed to the solar
plexus, and causes the nerves of ejection, to throw the dying matter out
of the stomach which is above. Try your reason and see the stomach below
sicken and unload its burden. Is this sickness natural and wisely
caused? If this is not the philosophy of mid-wifery what is? As soon as
a being takes possession of its room, the commissary of supplies begins
to furnish rations for that being, who has to build for itself a
dwelling place. The house must be built strictly to the letter of the
specifiction. Much bone and flesh must be put into the house of life,
and some of all elements known to the chemist, must be used and wisely
blended to give strength; also all material to be used in the house must
be exact in form and given strength equal to all forces, that may be
necessary to execute the hard and continued labors of the machinery that
may be used in all transactions and motions of mind and body. Now we
must go to the manufacturing chief, and have him through the
quartermaster deliver and keep a full supply of all kinds of material
for the work, and when the engine is done, put it on an inclined plane
and cut the stay-chains and let it run out of the shop. Be careful and
not let the engine deface nor tear the door as it comes out. A question
is asked: On what road does the quarter-master send the supplies? As
there is but one system over which an engine can bring supplies, we will
call that road the uterine system of arteries. The mechanic reports that
he will open the door of this great shop of manufacturing, and let it
roll out the engine by the power and methods prepared to run out
finished work. First you see a door open because the lock is taken off
by a key that opens all mysteries; and the great ropes that have been
far inferior to the force of resistance, that has held the door shut,
are all sufficient in power. By getting sick, muscles become convulsed
to rigidity of great strength with force enough to push the new engine
of life out into open space easily, by nature's team that never fails to
obey orders to deliver all goods intrusted to its care.


PREPARATION FOR DELIVERY.

A student of mid-wifery can only learn a few general principles, before
he gets into the field of experience. Actual contact with labor teaches
him that much that he has read and had told to him by professors of
mid-wifery in the lectures, is of but little use to him at the bedside.
What he needs to know is, what he will have to do after he gets there.
He must know the form and size of the bones of a woman, how large a hole
the three bones of the pelvis make, for the reason that the child's head
will soon come through that hole. He must know a normal head cannot come
through a pelvis that has been crushed in so much as to bring the pubis
within one and one-half to two and one-half inches of the sacrum. He
must examine and know, and do this soon after he is called, for the
reason, that he will have to use instruments in such deformities, and
may wish the counsel of an older and more experienced doctor. And this
precaution will give him time to be ready for any emergency.

But more than ninety per cent of all cases are of a very simple nature.
The mother is warned by pains in back and womb, coming and repeating at
intervals of one-half hour to less time. When by the finger the doctor
can tell the mouth of the womb has opened to the size of a quarter or
half dollar, he then may know that labor will soon start in good
earnest, and at this time it is well to call for a twine, cut two
strings about a foot long, to tie around the navel cord.


CAUTION.

The first duty of the obstetrician is to carefully examine the bones of
the pelvis and spine of the mother, to ascertain if they are normal in
shape and position. If there is any doubt about the spine and pelvis
being in good condition for the passage of the head, through the bones,
and you find pelvic deformity enough to prohibit the passage of the
head, notify the parties of the danger in the case at once, and that you
do not wish to take the responsibility alone, as it may require
instruments to deliver the child, as there is danger of death to the
child and mother also, but less danger to the mother than to the child.
Now you have done that which is a safeguard against all trouble
following criminal ignorance.

I will give you a condensed rule of procedure in all normal cases of
obstetrics. With index finger, examine os uteri; if closed and only
backache, have patient turn on right side, and press hand on abdomen
above pelvis, and gently press or lift belly up just enough to allow
blood to pass down and up pelvis and limbs. Relax all nerves of the
pelvis at pubes.


SECOND EXAMINATION.

Caution: Wait a few hours; examine os again. If still closed and no
periodical pains are present, you are safe to leave case in the hands of
the nurse, instructed to send for you if regular pains return at
intervals. On your return, explore os again, if found to open as large
as a dime, you are by this notified that labor has begun its work of
delivery. You now place patient on her back, propped to an easy angle of
near thirty degrees, with rubber blanket in place. After you find os,
dilated to nearly the size of a dollar, then relax nerves at pubes. Soon
you will find in mouth of womb an egg-shaped pouch of water, which you
must not press with fingers till very late in labor, for fear of
stopping labor for perhaps many hours. Remember the head can and does
turn in pelvis to suit the easiest passage through the bones, while in
the fluids of the amniotic sack. Now, as you know why not to rupture
sack and spill fluids, you are prepared to proceed to other duties,
which are to prevent rupture of perineum. Place the left hand on the
belly, about two inches above symphesis and push the soft parts down
with the left hand; support the perineum with the right hand until head
passes over. This is necessary to prevent rupture of perineum.


LASCERATION NEED NOT OCCUR.

If you follow this law of nature, lasceration may occur in one out of a
thousand cases, and you will be to blame for that one, and may be
censured for criminal ignorance. Now you have conducted head safely
through pelvis and vagina to the world. You will find pains stop right
short off for about a minute, which is the time to learn whether the
navel cord is wrapped around the child's neck.


CARE OF CORD.

If it is found all around the neck once or more, you must slip finger
down neck and loosen cord to let blood pass through the cord till next
pain comes, in order to ward off asphyxia of child.

When pain comes, gently pull child's head down toward the bed. There is
no danger of hurting the perineum now since the head has passed the soft
parts. At this time the danger is suffocation of child. Never draw child
too far away from mother's birth place by force, as you may tear navel
string from the child and cause it to bleed to death. If you value the
life of the child, then you must be careful not to place the navel end
of the string in any danger of being torn off. Now you have made a good
job for both mother and child so far. The child is in the world; and you
want to show the mother a living baby for her labor and suffering of the
past nine months. The baby is born and the mother is not torn, but the
baby has not yet cried. Turn it on its side, face down, run your finger
in its mouth and draw out all fluids, thick or thin, to let the breath
pass to the lungs. Then blow cold breath on its face and breast to cause
its lungs to act.


SEVERING CORD.

Baby cries, all is safe now. Baby is born safely and cries nicely, but
still has cord fastened to afterbirth. It has no further use for cord,
as life does not depend upon blood from the afterbirth any longer. Take
the cord about three inches from the child's belly, between thumb and
finger, and strip towards child to push bowels out of the cord if there
should be any in it, as a safeguard for bowels, then tie a strong string
around cord, first three inches from child's belly, second, four inches;
take the cord in your hand and look what you are doing. If baby's hand
should fall back to cord, you might cut off one or two fingers, or wound
the hand or arm very seriously. Cut cord between the two ties just made
on navel string. Look out for your scissors; pass the child over to the
nurse to be washed and dressed, while you deliver the afterbirth from
pelvis or womb.


PUTTING ON BELLY BAND.

When the child's shirt is on, cut a hole the size of your thumb in a
doubled piece of cloth, five inches long by four wide, put the hole two
inches from one end, and run the cord through the hole. Lay the cloth
across the child's belly, then fold the cloth lengthwise over the cord,
which must lie across the child so it will not stretch cord by handling
or straightening child out. Now you are ready to finish the delivery of
the afterbirth. You have a plug of soft and tender flesh to get out of
the womb and vagina.


DELIVERY OF AFTERBIRTH.

As the afterbirth has been grown tight to the womb during all the days
of mother's pregnancy, and furnished all the blood to build and keep the
child alive in the womb for nine months, it has done all it can do for
the child, and is now ready to leave the womb.

You are there to assist it to get out of the place it has occupied so
long. You must begin first to rotate or roll the placenta first one way
and then another, up, down and across the vagina, by gently pulling the
cord. Look out or you will pull the cord loose from the placenta; then
you will have made your first blunder,--no cord to pull placenta with,
and the mother bleeding and faint from loss of blood. Now is the time
and place to save life. Pass your hand forward into the soft parts to
get your fingers behind the placenta; now give a rolling pull and bring
it out with the hand. You will find it an easy matter to get your hand
into the vagina and womb after the birth of the child. Get all the
placenta out, then take a wad of cloth or rags as large as the child's
head, and press it under the cross bone of the pelvis; push the cloth
under and up, so as to completely plug the pelvis. Now pull the hair
gently over the symphesis, which will cause the womb to contract by
irritation.


PREPARING FOR MOTHER'S COMFORT.

All is now done but to provide for the mother's comfort, which is your
next duty. Draw her chemise down her back and legs until it is straight,
then with safety pins, pin the chemise on inner side of thighs so that
the chemise will go around both thighs separately. Now you have the
shirt fast to keep it from sliding upwards, and you are ready to make a
band of the chemise to support the womb and abdomen. Bring the chemise
tightly together for two or three inches above the pelvis to form a
band. Previous to pinning, draw the lump (womb) you feel above
symphesis, up, then pin, and the belt you have made of the chemise will
support the womb. All is safe now, but you must not leave for two hours.
You may have delivered a feeble woman, who may flood to death after
delivery of the child, if you do not leave her safe. I have in mind one
case who flooded all of two quarts at a single dash. The first symptom
was a pain in the head.


POST-DELIVERY HEMORRHAGE.

I know of only two causes that would produce hemorrhage or bleeding
after the child is delivered. One is when the afterbirth (placenta), is
separated from its attachment to the womb and still retained in the
womb or vagina, or when a part is separated and still lies in the womb,
that retention of placenta prevents the natural circular contraction of
the womb, to close on itself and retain it, with force enough to prevent
the further discharge of blood, would give a chance for a continued
stream. Then should the patient bleed profusely after the placenta has
been removed, another cause would be in pulling away the afterbirth, as
part of the upper portion of the womb may be pulled to an inverted
position, which would be like a hat if you press the top down with the
hand. Then there is a chance for leakage because of this unnatural fold
made in the womb.


TREATMENT FOR.

My method of relief is to insert the hand, and with back of fingers
smooth out all folds. Before you draw the right hand from the womb place
left hand on abdomen, catch the womb between the thumb and finger and
withdraw hand. With the left hand pull the hair above symphesis or
scratch the flesh just above across the region of the symphesis, just
enough to make an irritation. After the hand is out of vagina pass a
small bundle of cloths as far under the symphesis as would be necessary
to hold everything up, then fasten chemise; beginning at symphesis draw
it tight for about two inches above symphesis and with strong pins
fasten it. Be sure you keep garment tight by pulling down between limbs.
The coarser the chemise the better, as you want to make a strong bandage
at that point so as not to push the womb down into the pelvis. If the
patient's general health is fairly good let her tell you what she wants
to eat, and go and get it. Let her diet be after her usual custom. You
must remember she has just left the condition of a full abdomen. Lace
her up, fill her up and make her comfortable for six hours; then change
her bedding.


FOOD FOR MOTHER.

Remember this, if you stop digestion on her for some hours with teas,
soups and shadows to eat, you carry her to the condition where it would
be dangerous to give her a hearty meal. My experience and custom for
forty years has been crowned with good success. I never lost a case in
confinement. I have universally told the cook to give her plenty to eat.


TREATMENT FOR SORE BREAST.

If she begins to have fever followed by chilly sensations, with swelling
of one or both breasts, I relieve that by laying her arm ranging with
her body. Let some one hold the arm down to the bed, then I place both
of my hands under the arm, pull it up with considerable force till I
get it as high or higher than normal position of the shoulder. Then pull
her shoulder straight out from the body a fairly good pull, then pull
the arm up on a straight line with the face, and be sure that you have
let loose the axillary and mammary veins, nerve and artery, which have
been cramped by pulling the arm down during delivery. No breast should
become caked in the hands of an Osteopath. Do not bother about the
bowels for two or three days. It may be necessary to use the catheter if
the water should fail to pass off after inhibiting the pubic system.
This is straight mid-wifery and will guide you through at least in
ninety per cent of the cases you will meet in normally formed women.

Right here I wish to say one word: I think it is very wrong to teach,
talk and spend so much time with pictures, cuts, talks and lectures, and
hold up constantly to the view of the student, births coming from the
worst imaginable deformities and call that a knowledge of mid-wifery. It
is normal mid-wifery you want to know and be well-skilled in. The
abnormal formations are few and far between, and when a case of that
kind does appear, it is your knowledge of the normal that guides you
through the variations. You will very likely never find two abnormals
presenting the same form of bone. As this is intended to only present
to the student natural delivery I will let the subject drop with one
word about the sore tongue of the mother. Adjust her neck, relieve
constrictor and all other muscles that would impede any blood vessel
that should drain the mouth and tongue. Remember this, that a horse that
is always hunting bugars never finds a smooth road.




CHAPTER XVIII.

CONVULSIONS.

     Old Phrases--Results of Stoppage of Fluids--Old Theory of
     Fits--What the Real Cause may be--Listen for the Cause--What is a
     Fit--Sensory System Demanding Nourishment--The Causes--The
     Remedy--Dislocation of Atlas and of Four Upper Ribs.


OLD PHRASES.

As old phrases that have long been in use as names for the various
diseases have almost grown to the degree of disgust, I laid them aside
and have been trying and have succeeded in unfolding natural laws to a
better understanding, which do and should be our guide and action in
treating all diseases that mar the peace and happiness of the human race
by misery and death. By such old systems with their foolish and
unreliable suggestions, of how to guide the doctor in treating diseases
which have proven unworthy of respect, if merit is to be our rule of the
weights and measures of intelligence. I have become so disgusted with
such verbiage with the sense that follows the pens that have written
treatise on disease, that I have concluded to do like Adam of old, give
names that may appear novel to the reader when I wish to draw the
attention of the student who is trying to obtain a knowledge of the
mysteries hitherto unsolved and unexplained. We have panned and washed
by their suggestions and have obtained no gold. There are two very large
and powerful rivers passing their fluids in opposite directions over a
territory that I will call the Klondike of life. This territory is
bounded on the east by a great wall, which according to the old books
has been called the diaphragm, through which comes forth a great river
of life that spreads all over the plains of the anterior lumbar region.
On that plain we find a great system of perfect irrigation of cities,
villages, and fertile soils of life.


RESULT OF STOPPAGE OF FLUIDS.

This region of country covers one of the greatest and most fertile
fields of life producing elements, and places them on the thoroughfares,
and sends them back over the great central railroad, the thoracic duct,
from lymphatics of the whole abdomen, to the heart and lungs to be
converted into a higher order of living matter. When finished it is
called blood, to sustain its own machinery, and all other machines of
the body, giving rise to the mental question: "What would be the effect
produced to life and health, if we should cut off, dam up or suspend the
flowing of the aorta as it descends close by the vena cava and thoracic
duct as they return with contents through the diaphragm on their journey
to the heart and lungs for manufacture and finish. And after having
supplied the plain, what would be the effect if the vena cava and its
system of drainage, and the thoracic duct should be dammed up so that
chyle and blood could not be carried to the heart and lungs for renewal,
purification, and finish. How much thought would be required to see that
by stopping the arterial flow or that of the vena cava an irritating and
famishing condition would ensue, with congested veins, lymphatics and
all organs of the abdomen, to that condition called fermentation,
congestion and inflammation, which in time is thrown off by sloughing
away the substances of the lymphatics of the whole abdominal system of
glands that belong to a liver, a kidney, the uterus and the bowels, to
the condition that has long since been a mystery, and called typhoid
fever, dysentery, bilious fever, periodical spasms, and on through the
whole list of general and special diseases of winter and summer. I would
advise the practicing Osteopath to do some very careful panning up and
down the rivers of this Klondike, for if you fail to find gold, and much
of it, you had better spend the remainder of your life where reason
dwelleth not. Ever remembering that ignorance of the geography and
customs of this country is the wet powder of success."


OLD THEORY OF FITS.

We often see a woman or man afflicted with fits or falling sickness
which the doctor has failed to cure. What is a fit? For want of a better
knowledge we have an established theory that "hysteria" is purely her
imagination and as we must respect old theories, we will call it a fit
of meanness. This is what we have had for breakfast, dinner and supper
and we are asked to respect such trash because of the "established
theories."

We are instructed by the universal "all" of the graduates of various
medical schools to call her a criminal and proceed to punish her with a
wet towel, well twisted, and administered freely--more comprehensively
expressed by the term "spanker" and "spank her" very much--late from
Scotland with all Europe, and schools in America, except the American
School of Osteopathy, which recommends to "wallop" and "wallop" very
freely the empty headed schools and theories that have no more sense
than to torture a sick person and do so to disguise their ignorance of
the cause of her disease, which is shown by the spasmodic effect that
has been named by a little book of guess work, generally called and
universally known as symptomatology.


WHAT THE REAL CAUSE MAY BE.

Not a single author has hinted or in any way intimated that the cause of
her disease is a failure of the passing of the blood, chyle and other
substances to and from the abdomen to nourish and renovate the abdominal
viscera caused by a prolapsed diaphragm, which would cause resistance to
the passing of the aorta, through which passes the arterial blood
through the crura, and the vena cava that returns the venous blood, and
through which crura the chyle is conducted from the receptaculum chyli
before decomposition by fermentation sets up.


LISTEN FOR THE CAUSE.

The afflicted is intoxicated. Here is where she gets a poisonous alcohol
and will never be relieved permanently until the "wet towel" of reason
has slapped on both sides of the attending physician's head, so he can
hear the squeezing and rattling of regurgitation, and straining and
creaking of the fluids in their effort to pass through that great and
strong towel called the diaphragm. Until he learns this I would apply
the wet towel of reason to the doctor, for fear he becomes lukewarm in
his studies and gives his patient a hypodermic injection of morphine,
which is the advice as given at the last council of medical men who
practice "old established" theories rather than be honest enough to say:
"The woman is sick and I know it, but I do not know the cause of her
trouble."


WHAT IS A FIT?

What is a fit? If God's judgment is to be respected a fit is the
life-saving step and move, perfectly natural, perfectly reasonable, and
should be so respected and received as divinely wise, because on that
natural action which is produced on the constrictor nerves first, then
the muscles, nerves, veins and arteries with all their centers. It
appears at this time that the vital fluids have all been used up, or
consumed, by the sensory system, and in order to be temporarily
replenished, this convulsion shows its natural use by squeezing vital
fluids from all parts of the body to nourish and sustain the sensory,
which has been emptied by mental and vital action, until death is
inevitable without this convulsing element to supply the sensory system,
though it may be but a short time.


SENSORY SYSTEM DEMANDING NOURISHMENT.

The oftener the fits come, the oftener the nutrient system of the
sensory cries aloud in its own, though unmistakable language, that it
must have nourishment, that it may run the machinery of life, or it must
give up the ghost and die. In this dire extremity and struggle for
life, it has asked the motor system to suspend its action, use its power
and squeeze out of any part of the whole body though it be the brain
itself, a few drops of cerebro-spinal fluid, or anything higher or
lower, so it may live.

Those of you acquainted with the fertile fields of the Klondike referred
to, will be enabled to furnish the sensory system with such nutriment,
as will not make it necessary to appeal to you through the language used
by the unconscious convulsions with all their horrible contortions.


THE CAUSES.

Thus you surely see with the microscope of reason that the sensory
nerves must be constantly nourished, and that all nutriment for the
nerves must be obtained from the abdomen, though its propelling force
should come directly from the brain.


THE REMEDY.

The nerve courses from the brain must be unobstructed from the cerebrum,
cerebellum, the medulla oblongata, and on through the whole spinal cord;
with a normal neck, a normal back, and normal ribs, which to an
Osteopath means careful work, with power to know, and mind to reason
that the work is done wisely to a finish. I hope that with these
suggestions you will go on with the investigation to a satisfactory
degree of success.


DISLOCATION OF THE FOUR UPPER RIBS.

I wish to insert a short paragraph on a few effects following a down,
front, and outer dislocation of the four upper ribs of either side. We
have been familiar with asthma, goitre, pen-paralysis, shaking palsy,
spasms, and heart diseases of various kinds. We have been as familiar
with the existence of those abnormal variations as we are of the rising
and the setting of the sun. Our best philosophers on diseases and causes
have elaborately written and published their conclusions, and the world
has carefully perused with deep interest, what they have said of all the
diseases above named, also diseases of the lung, and to-day we are by
them left in total darkness as to the cause of the above named diseases,
also fits, insanity, loss of voice, brachial agitans, and many other
diseases of the chest, neck and head. As the field is open and clear for
any philosopher to establish his point of observation, note and report
what he observes, I will avail myself of this opportunity, and say in a
very few words, I have found no one of the diseases above indicated to
have an existence without some variation of the first few of the upper
ribs of the chest. With this I will leave farther exploration in the
hands of other persons; and await the report of their observations pro
and con.




CHAPTER XIX.

CONCLUDING REMARKS.

     Thoughts for Consideration--Offering a New Philosophy--Lymphatics
     and Fascia--A Satisfactory Experiment--Natural Washing Out.


THOUGHTS FOR CONSIDERATION.

"Let us not forget the assembling of ourselves together." Whether this
quotation applies to us or not, as an Osteopath I will venture to say
that the honored dead, and the honest living intelligent healers of all
schools, and all systems of trying to relieve our race from disease and
suffering, so far as I have been able to ascertain, have been forced to
guess how to proceed when they enter the "sick room" for want of a
philosophical system of procedure. We have collected together many or
few symptoms, named the disease, opened the battle, and on our side have
met the enemy and fought bravely all battles very much the same way. I
have spent one-half of a century in the field trying the many methods of
attacks; and used the best arms and ammunition to date, and designed to
do the greatest good. For twenty years or more I was content to be
governed by the opinions and customs of older and more experienced
physicians. I gave the disease its proper name. I gave the medicine as
taught and practiced, but was not satisfied that the line of procedure
was philosophically correct.


OFFERING A NEW PHILOSOPHY.

I believe at the present time I am fully prepared to say I can offer you
a more rational philosophy of what should be the physician's first
object, when called to repair a vessel that has become unseaworthy by
accumulated barnacles, and is placed upon the dry dock for restoration
to that condition called seaworthy, again. I believe this philosophy
will sustain the strongest minds in the conclusion that our first and
wisest step to successfully combat all diseases would be to inhibit
first the nerves of the lymphatics, then produce muscular constricture
and cause them to unload their diseased contents, and keep them
unloading until renovation is absolutely complete; leaving the
lymphatics in a purely healthy state, and keep them in this condition at
any period of the disease. I have long since been of the opinion that if
we could keep all impurities from accumulating in the lymphatics, and
never allow them to become overloaded, we would have no such diseases as
bilious fever, typhoid, mountain fever, malaria, pneumonia, flux, heart
disease, brain disease, fits, insanity and on to the whole list of
climatic troubles, and the troubles with the changes of winter and
summer.


LYMPHATICS AND FASCIA.

I have thought for many years that the lymphatics and cellular system of
the fascia, of the brain, the lungs, and the heart throughout the whole
system of blood supply, do get filled up with impure and unhealthy
fluids, long before any disease makes its appearance, and that the
procedure of changes known as fermentation, with its electromagnetic
disturbances, were the cause of at least ninety per cent of the diseases
that we labor to relieve by some chemical preparation called drugs. When
I was fully satisfied that we were liable to do more harm than good with
such remedies, I began to hunt for more reasonable methods to relieve
the system of its poisonous gases and fluids, through the excretory
system of the lymphatics and other channels, through which we had hoped
to renovate and purify the system.


A SATISFACTORY EXPERIMENT.

For twenty-five years I have tried to balance myself, divert my mind
from all previous methods and see if I could not get more directly to
the lymphatic system of nerves, and cause the millions of vessels known
to exist in the body to begin to unload their contents and continue
that action until all impurities were discharged by way of the bowels,
lungs, kidneys and porous system.


NATURAL WASHING OUT.

At the conclusion of this philosophy I will endeavor to explain just how
nature has provided to ward off diseases, by washing out before
fermentation should set up in the lymphatics, from being received and
retained the length of time, that destructive chemical changes would
begin its work of converting elements into gas and discharging them from
the system as unsuitable for nutriment. In order to avoid this calamity
we are met with two important thoughts, one of the power of the nerves
of the lymphatics to dilate and contract, also that of fascia and
muscle, to dilate or constrict with great force when necessary to eject
substances from gland, cell, muscle and fascia. Thus we see a cell
loaded to fullness by secretion which it cannot do without; open-mouthed
vessels through which it receives this fluid. Then again the system of
cellular sphincters must dilate and contract in order to retain the
fluids in those cell-like parts of the body. Now we are at the point
when ready for use in other parts of the system, those sphincters must
temporarily give away, that the gland may relax and dilate. Then the
universal principle of constriction throughout the whole body can
discharge the contents of the lymphatics of all divisions of the body,
which is surely the normal condition. Let the lymphatics always receive
and discharge naturally. If so we have no substance detained long enough
to produce fermentation, fever, sickness and death.

I think this thought has been presented plainly enough to be fully
understood and practiced by the reader, if an Osteopath.




CHAPTER XX.

THE SUPERIOR CERVICAL GANGLION.

     With what it has Communication--Its Position--One of its
     Functions--Stimulation or Inhibition--Results Produced.


WITH WHAT IT HAS COMMUNICATION.

Every ganglion on the great chain of the sympathetic nerve has special
and important functions, but upon the superior cervical falls the
greatest burden of responsibility. This ganglion has communication with
a greater number of nerves and organs than any other; is in direct
communication with three cranial and four cervical nerves, indirectly
with four more cranial nerves, and enters, by its branches into the
formation of a large number of plexuses. Through this ganglion it is
that much Osteopathic work is done, and the purpose of this brief paper
is to point out some of the many effects which may be produced by its
stimulation or inhibition.


ITS POSITION.

Anatomically we know that the superior cervical ganglion is situated in
relation to the transverse processes of the upper three cervical
vertebrae. It gives off branches which communicate directly with the
vagus, glosso-pharyngeal and hypoglossal nerves; another branch, the
ascending, passes into the carotid canal and enters into the formation
of the carotid and cavernous plexuses; other branches pass to the
pharynx, and a branch enters the formation of the cardiac plexuses. From
the carotid and cavernous plexuses pass many nerves, only a few of which
need special mention; one unites with the great superficial petrosal to
form the Vidian nerve which goes to _Meckel's_ ganglion, branches pass
to the Gasserian ganglion, while we have others passing to the third,
fourth, the ophthalmic division of the fifth and the sixth nerve, also
we have derived from the nerve the sympathetic root of the lenticular
ganglion.


ONE OF ITS FUNCTIONS.

Physiologically we know that one of the special functions of the
sympathetic nervous system is to control the tone of non-striate
muscular tissue, and that we have filaments distributed from the
sympathetic system in the muscular wall of every blood vessel, duct and
organ throughout the body. We also know that the sympathetic is the
accelerator nerve of the heart, being opposed in its action by the vagus
which, is inhibitory; further, that the vagus is constant in its
brake-like action, while the sympathetic only acts when stimulated
either directly or reflexly. While the vagus is inhibitory to the heart
it is motor to the lungs. Nerve force is not generated in the
sympathetic system; the cerebro-spinal nerve force is conveyed to the
ganglia by the rami communicantes and in the ganglia is transformed into
sympathetic nerve force. We might compare the ganglia to electrical
transformers. Such being the case it is not difficult to see that if the
superior cervical ganglion receives the nerve-force for transformation
from the upper four cervical nerves and we can prevent, or lessen, the
passage of nerve-force from the spinal cord through those nerves to the
ganglion, that we will, to a corresponding degree, lessen the amount of
sympathetic nerve-force transformed in the ganglion and transmitted from
it by its branches.


STIMULATION OR INHIBITION.

We can produce stimulation or inhibition of a nerve at will; press
suddenly and with a little violence upon the ulnar nerve where it lies
in relation with the internal condyle of the humerus and we will find a
manifestation of its physiological action, evidenced by a sense of pain
in the ulnar and radial sides of the fifth finger and the ulnar side of
the fourth, together with contraction of the muscles supplied by that
nerve. But if our pressure be less intense and more prolonged we will
inhibit the nerve and produce a sense of numbness in the same area
together with temporary loss of muscular control.

Osteopaths well understand how to produce either stimulation or
inhibition of the ganglia by way of the nerves passing to them from the
spinal cord, and the results of such inhibition or stimulation in any
sympathetic area can be prophesied readily by anyone who has read with
attention what I have written; for instance, in the case of inhibition
in the region of the nerves supplying the superior cervical ganglion
with nerve force, we will find, first, throughout the area of
distribution of the branches of this ganglion a relaxation of the
vascular walls. This will be marked by two indications, first, the skin
will become flushed and moist; second salivary secretion and lachrymal
secretion will be increased. Second, the vagus is now allowed full sway,
and we will find slowing of the heartbeat. It is well known that
pressure over the seat of the first spinal nerve for a very brief period
of time will control a congestive headache; the pressure in such case is
made only for so long time as to produce stimulation of the sympathetic
to greater activity, when we will attain a vaso-constrictor action,
lessen the volume of blood in the cranial cavity and so abolish the
headache. The arteries of the body may be divided into three groups, the
large, the medium-sized and the small; in the first of these we find
little muscular tissue and much elastic; in the second they exist in
about equal proportions, while in the small arteries we find much
muscular tissue and little elastic. As a consequence it is upon the
smaller arteries that the sympathetic system has its greatest effect. As
we dilate the smaller arteries and slow the heart action, it follows
that we reduce the blood pressure, as we reduce blood pressure we reduce
temperature, and within a very few minutes after the commencement of
this inhibitory pressure on the upper four cervical nerves we will find
in the large majority of cases, the capillaries over the entire surface
of the body flushed, this being accompanied by a fall in the pulse rate
and a marked diminution of the temperature. Indirectly at the same time
we produce an effect upon the lungs; as we lessen blood pressure and the
frequency of the heart action we find in accordance with the
physiological rule an alteration in the respiration, it becomes slower
and deeper. Arguing along these lines, and applying similar reasoning to
each of the branches of this ganglion, anyone can trace out the many
subsidiary results which may be expected from either stimulation of the
rami communicantes nerves distributed to it, or their inhibition.
Exactly similar rulings will find their prompt proof with regard to any
other of the ganglia of the sympathetic system. We will find
corresponding results in the cases of the thoracic ganglia which form by
their branches the pulmonic plexuses; we get the same results from the
splanchnic ganglia; while in the lumbar region we find that we have a
ready means of control of the vascular system in the lower abdomen and
pelvis. Much, very much, is still to be learned concerning the
sympathetic nervous system, and all such increase in knowledge can come
in one way only, clinical observation of Osteopathic treatment.

   WILLIAM SMITH,
   L. R. C. P. and S., (EDIN.), D. O.


THE END.


       *       *       *       *       *


A. T. Still's Table or Device,

That He Has Constructed For

THE USE OF THE OPERATOR, THE EASE AND COMFORT OF THE PATIENT.


It is a welcome success and does away with the lubberly old tables. It
gives ease and support to all classes of patients. By its use the
patient can sit in a chair or on a stool and feel at perfect ease during
all treatments, then the operator gets results and is not tired to death
when he has treated a patient; knows and feels that there has been some
good done.

The asthmatic knows he has gotten help because pain has left his chest
and he breathes as with new lungs; he knows he is helped more by one
treatment while sitting on a chair with his body easy and at rest in the
cushioned swinging device than he would or has received by the best
skill on any table. Then the operator says, "Thank fortune, I am not
worn out, and know I have gotten every bone to the place it belongs, and
I know I have given satisfactory relief because my patients say so."

I think to an operator this device is his best friend. With it well
understood he can do as much work as three good operators can do on the
old tables. Remember this device does no part of the treatment but
places the patient to your convenience while you do the work.

I feel as I am the discoverer of the device, that I know its needs and
feel free to advise pupils.

The device will cost you $25 only.

   A. T. STILL,
   Founder.




The American School of Osteopathy,

KIRKSVILLE, MO.


The course of study in The American School of Osteopathy is a carefully
graded one, and is divided into four terms, of five months each. The
terms beginning September and February of each year. The course thus
requires two years for completion.


COURSE OF STUDY.

The course of study extends over two years, and is divided into four
terms of five months each.


FIRST TERM.

The first term is devoted to Descriptive Anatomy including Osteology,
Syndesmology and Myology; lectures on Histology illustrated by
micro-stereopticon; the principles of General Chemistry and Physics.


SECOND TERM.

The second term includes Descriptive and Regional Anatomy; didactic and
laboratory work in Histology; Physiology; Physiological Chemistry and
Urinalysis; Principles of Osteopathy; Clinical Demonstrations in
Osteopathy.


THIRD TERM.

The third term includes Demonstrations in Regional Anatomy; Physiology;
lectures in Pathology illustrated by micro-stereopticon; Symptomatology;
Physiological Psychology; Clinical Demonstrations in Osteopathy.


FOURTH TERM.

The fourth term includes Symptomatology; Minor Surgery; didactic and
laboratory work in Pathology; Psycho-Pathology; Gynaeocology; Obstetrics;
Sanitation and Public Health; Venereal Diseases; Medical Jurisprudence;
Clinical Demonstrations; Clinical Practice.

       *       *       *       *       *

The school is open to students of both sexes without distinction, and
all have equal opportunities and privileges, and are held to the same
requirements.

The methods of instruction are such as obtain in the best academic and
collegiate institutions, and include recitations from standard
text-books, lectures, quizzes, practical laboratory work, and practical
clinical work.

The equipment of the school is complete in every respect. The recitation
and lecture rooms are amply provided with all necessary means of
illustration, such as specimens fresh and preserved, skeletons, models,
charts, manikins and diagrams.

The respective laboratories are fitted up with all the necessary
apparatus for practical work in the Anatomical, Histological,
Microscopical, Chemical and Physiological departments.

The clinical facilities and opportunities enjoyed by students in this
school are exceptional. An abundance of material is always available for
clinic demonstrations, which are continued daily through two terms, with
practical work in the clinic operating rooms by each student, under the
direction of the regular operators, daily during the whole of the last
term.

In addition to the regular clinical department, the A. T. Still
Infirmary has constantly under treatment from three hundred to five
hundred patients, and although the students do not see these patients,
the many cases of diseases of all kinds under the care of the regular
operators in the Infirmary give them constantly fresh and varied
illustrations for use in their lectures. Sometimes, too, patients whose
cases may be of special interest offer the use of their cases for the
purpose of demonstration before the students.

Opportunities are thus furnished to students for such practice and drill
in the actual work of treating diseases as we believe is not equaled by
any similar institution anywhere. The course of study is progressively
graded with a view to giving students a thorough and comprehensive
knowledge of the facts and principles upon which their future work is to
be based. These clinic exercises in connection and immediately following
give them facility and readiness in the art of applying the facts and
principles which they have acquired in recognizing and treating diseased
conditions.

Catalogue mailed upon application. For information as to terms, etc.,
apply to

   A. T. STILL,        AMERICAN SCHOOL OF OSTEOPATHY.
   PRESIDENT.                   KIRKSVILLE, MO.




The A. T. Still Infirmary

Cures by the Science of Osteopathy all Diseases Which are Known as
Curable.


Dr. A. T. STILL, founder of the Science of Osteopathy, has associated
with him, in his infirmary organization, the oldest and most successful
practitioners and exponents of the science, selected with special
reference to their fitness for the work of practically demonstrating the
principles of Osteopathy and occupying positions as teachers and
lecturers in the American School of Osteopathy. All are regular
graduates of this school.

The students in the school are not permitted to even assist in treating
the Infirmary patients. All the work is done by regular operators.

The examination previous to treatment is conducted by Dr. Still's three
sons assisted by the operators. After examination the patient is
assigned to the room in which he or she will receive treatment, and
placed under the care of an Osteopath best suited to the case.

The fees for treatment at the Infirmary are $25 per month. Where
patients are unable to come to the Infirmary for treatment, an extra
charge of $1 to $2 per visit is added.

The Infirmary maintains a complete bathing department in charge of
competent attendants. As good baths are therefore obtainable in
Kirksville as in any city. The charges are very moderate--twenty-five
cents for a single bath, or $2.00 for a commutation ticket for ten
baths. When bath tickets are procured no other fees to attendants are
necessary.

A representative of the Infirmary meets all trains, day and night, to
help all patients who may need assistance and see that they are properly
cared for.


OPERATIVE SURGERY.

To correct a misapprehension on the part of many, it should be
understood that the A. T. STILL INFIRMARY is fully prepared to receive
and handle the most difficult cases requiring the highest order of
skilled surgery, and it is not necessary to send such cases to the great
city hospitals in the east for even the most difficult and delicate
operations.

Dr. J. B. Littlejohn, of the faculty, is a graduate in surgery from the
University of Glasgow, Scotland, and held for three years the position
of Surgeon under the Government Board of England, besides other
important and responsible positions in Europe and America.

Dr. Wm. Smith holds evidences of qualifications as follows: Licentiate
of the Royal College of Surgery, Edinburg; Licentiate of the Royal
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Glasgow; Licentiate in Midwifery,
Edinburg and Glasgow; etc.

Cases requiring careful and delicate Surgery, the removal of fibroid
tumors, and in fact any operation of whatever nature will receive the
best and most scientific treatment and care in this institution.

The management has now secured a powerful and perfect Roentgen or X-Ray
apparatus which will be used in connection with this department, in the
examination of difficult cases.

Patients coming to the A. T. Still Infirmary may rely upon the fact that
they will in no case be subjected to unnecessary surgical operations, as
the knife is never used unless absolutely necessary.

Address all letters of inquiry to

   A. T. STILL INFIRMARY,
   KIRKSVILLE, MO

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
|Transcriber's note:                                                  |
|                                                                     |
|Corrections have been made to everyday words printed incorrectly, but|
|all technical terms are as in the original.                          |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+






End of Project Gutenberg's Philosophy of Osteopathy, by Andrew T. Still

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PHILOSOPHY OF OSTEOPATHY ***

***** This file should be named 25864.txt or 25864.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/8/6/25864/

Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
